娀 Academy of Management Journal
2013, Vol. 56, No. 2, 334–357.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5465/amj.2010.0512
EMOTION HELPING BY MANAGERS:
AN EMERGENT UNDERSTANDING OF DISCREPANT
ROLE EXPECTATIONS AND OUTCOMES
GINKA TOEGEL
IMD, Lausanne
MARTIN KILDUFF
University College London
N. ANAND
IMD, Lausanne
Why do managers help employees with their negative emotions, and how do employees
respond? We analyzed interview and network data from the head office of a recruiting
agency. We found that managers active in the provision of emotion help thought of
such help as over and above their managerial duties, whereas employees defined
emotional support as managerial in-role behavior. Both parties accepted the necessity
of controlling negative emotions for the good of the organization. But those being
helped tended to perceive their helpers as doubly powerful figures, invested with both
formal authority and parental authority, whereas the helpers saw themselves as
reacting to situational contingencies to do favors for subordinates in need. Our results
point to an emergent understanding of discrepant interpretations. Employees treat
caring as part of the managers’ role that requires no reciprocation, whereas managers
see such help-giving as discretionary extra-role behavior that requires reciprocated
commitment. Discrepant expectations concerning emotion helping leads to positive
outcomes (e.g., managers being attributed leadership qualities by subordinates) but
also negative outcomes (e.g., managers feeling disappointed at the lack of reciprocity).
We contribute an emergent model of discrepant interpretations concerning emotion
helping with implications for research on leadership, emotion management, and
critical theory.
The provision of emotion help is the subject of
continuing debate between labor and management
concerning who should be in control of the process
(Bacharach, Bamberger, & Sonnenstuhl, 1996: 481).
Paralleling this controversy, there are widely dif-
fering views among researchers concerning man-
agement provision of emotional help to employees.
Critical theorists argue that traditionally private as-
pects of life—such as emotions—should not be sub-
sumed under the managerial gaze (Bolton, 2005).
But a variety of approaches derived from social
exchange theory (Blau, 1964; Lawler & Thye, 1999)
suggest that the provision of emotion help is part of
an exchange arrangement by which employees re-
ciprocate increased commitment, performance, or
personal favors. Thus, social exchange researchers
concerned with employee-organizational relation-
ships suggest that a caring attitude toward employ-
ees enhances employees’ affective commitment to
their organization (Tsui, Pearce, Porter, & Tripoli,
1997). Similarly, recent extensions to leader-mem-
ber exchange (LMX) theory show that a supervisor
who establishes a supportive relationship with key
subordinates through the provision of emotional
and other kinds of support generates organizational
commitment on the part of the employees which, in
turn, is expected to lead to in-role and extra-role
increases in employee performance (Eisenberger et
We thank Peter Bamberger for his consistently helpful
guidance throughout the review process, and three re-
viewers for their insightful comments. Prior versions of
this article benefited from comments from Sally Maitlis
and Hugh Willmott, to whom we extend heartfelt thanks.
The article was also improved through presentations at
the University of Alberta (2007), the Academy of Man-
agement meeting (2008), OTREG at the University of
Cambridge (2010), and the organizational behavior read-
ing group at the University of Cambridge (2010).
334
Copyright of the Academy of Management, all rights reserved. Contents may not be copied, emailed, posted to a listserv, or otherwise transmitted without the copyright holder’s express
written permission. Users may print, download, or email articles for individual use only.2013
Toegel, Kilduff, and Anand
al., 2010). Further, supervisors who provide sup-
port to their subordinates can, according to LMX
theory, expect their subordinates to reciprocate by
doing favors for the supervisors (Wayne, Shore, &
Liden, 1997).
Although the importance of social exchange in
the context of emotion help and other forms of
prosocial and organizational citizenship behaviors
(OCBs) between managers and subordinates is well
established (Organ, 1988), questions concerning
why and how managers engage in the process of
helping subordinates with their negative emotions
remain to be answered. The process of exchange
does not adequately explain why supervisors
would overcome the general human tendency of
avoiding people perceived to be suffering from neg-
ative emotions (see the discussion in Hareli and
Rafaeli [2008: 46]), given that such help is often
taken for granted by recipients (George & Brief,
1992: 311), and given that supervisors who provide
such help are reported to suffer detrimental per-
sonal and career consequences (Frost, 2003).
Our contribution is to build from case research
toward an emergent model of discrepant interpre-
tations concerning managerial emotion helping in
organizations. We identify different types of emo-
tion help and describe how discrepant views of
emotion helping on the part of managers and sub-
ordinates contribute to outcomes both positive and
negative. Drawing from a review of employee help-
seeking research (Bamberger, 2009), we contribute
to leadership research, research on emotion man-
agement, and a critical theory perspective to the
developing literature that takes a more nuanced
approach to OCB (Bergeron, 2007; Bolino, 1999;
Spector & Fox, 2010; Van Dyne & Ellis, 2004).
Given competing demands on managers to con-
trol work activity and promote employee welfare,
our data show that managers and subordinates dis-
agreed as to whether managerial efforts to amelio-
rate employees’ negative emotions represented dis-
cretionary good citizenship behavior or expected
managerial role enactment (cf. Katz and Kahn
[1966] on incompatible role expectations). This in-
congruence extended to the expectation of reci-
procity, with subordinates seeing little or no obli-
gation to reciprocate for emotion help received,
whereas managers expected reciprocation in the
form of subordinate commitment and personal loy-
alty. Representing the viewpoint of the managers,
the CEO of the company we studied noted: “It is
human nature, isn’t it? When you do something for
someone, you always kind of expect to be recipro-
335
cated. If we go to the pub and I buy you a drink, it
will sort of be expected that the next time around,
you buy me one. It is in every element of our
culture— except in the workplace. They [direct re-
ports] don’t see that.”
Emotional expression is a constitutive aspect of
exchange processes (Lawler & Thye, 1999: 239), but
between a manager and a subordinate exchange
processes are also overlaid with differences in role
expectations. If a manager sees provision of help as
extra-role behavior, the manager is likely to expect
payback in the form of specific, personally pro-
vided help in the future, given the prevalence of
reciprocity norms in social interaction (Cialdini,
Vincent, Lewis, Catalan, Wheeler, & Darby, 1975).
To the extent that employees feel themselves so-
cially indebted to managers, they are likely to feel
bound to the social system that provides them with
emotion help. Thus, the provision of help by man-
agers to employees suffering negative emotions can
be seen as promoting dependency, particularly to
the extent that there is likely to be ambiguity as to
whether and when social indebtedness has been
repaid (Gouldner, 1960: 175).
Indeed, employees are more likely to access help
with emotional problems, to the extent that they
perceive that there are no expectations concerning
immediate and direct payback to specific managers
(Bamberger, 2009: 76 –77). Thus, the stage is set for
managers to be disappointed by the absence of re-
ciprocation by employees who have been helped.
Employees in general tend to view supervisors as
acting on behalf of the organization (Rousseau,
1989). According to recent extensions to LMX the-
ory, when employees identify their supervisor with
the organization, they are likely to “attribute favor-
able treatment by the supervisor to the organization
and, as a result, feel obligated to the organization”
(Eisenberger et al., 2010: 3). Thus, the supervisor is
likely to feel disappointed if he or she is expecting
personal reciprocity rather than a more generalized
reciprocity toward the organization itself.
Emotion helping by managers is puzzling from a
theoretical point of view, given that managers pay a
price in terms of burnout and career stagnation for
monitoring and helping employees deal with neg-
ative emotions (Frost, 2003). Emotion helping be-
haviors include talking, listening, and expressing
concern or empathy for distressed individuals (Zel-
lars & Perrewé, 2001), and these behaviors consti-
tute part of a larger category of discretionary ac-
tions referred to as organizational citizenship
behaviors (Organ, 1988, 1997). Through an analysis336
Academy of Management Journal
of interview data from both managers and employ-
ees in a typical service organization, we develop a
model of emotion helping in organizations that
takes account of incongruence between managers
and employees with respect to how emotion help is
perceived and whether reciprocation is required for
such emotion help.
EMOTION MANAGEMENT IN
THE SERVICE SECTOR
In today’s workplace, most jobs involve service
encounters, so there has been renewed attention to
the management of emotions in person-to-person
encounters (e.g., Grandey, 2008) and the manage-
ment of emotional attachments by employees to
work groups (e.g., Lawler, Thye, & Yoon, 2009).
Such has been the “heightened enthusiasm” on the
part of practitioners and academics concerning the
management of emotions that there has been a
“near explosion of research” on the topic (Elfen-
bein, 2007: 316), and this has been paralleled by the
provision of related leadership development and
executive coaching courses (see Peltier [2010] for
an overview of practitioner topics).
In the service sector, therefore, emotional labor—
defined as “the process of regulating both feelings
and expressions for the organizational goals”
(Grandey, 2000: 97)—is a major part of what is
monitored at work by employers who are in the
business of selling good feelings to customers
(Hochschild, 1983). Employees are expected to reg-
ulate their emotions, even when experiencing
stress and exhaustion (Grandey, 2000, 2003). In-
deed, “‘service with a smile’ is perceived as an
in-role job requirement for those with frequent in-
terpersonal contact” (Grandey, 2008: 247). Manag-
ers are called upon to be alert to signs that employ-
ees are suffering from negative emotions, and are
asked to be prepared to “intervene effectively and
preventively” (Ashkanasy & Daus, 2002: 80). To the
extent that work requires emotional labor, there-
fore, managers are likely to notice decrements in
emotional tone on the part of employees. Managing
subordinates’ emotions is now considered “one of
the main ways leaders influence performance”
(Humphrey, 2002: 497) and is seen as particularly
useful in times of shrinking budgets, when keeping
customers satisfied can prove challenging (Bolton,
2005: 60).
The increase in scholarly attention toward emo-
tion helping in the workplace suggests that this
seldom-observed phenomenon may be more perva-
April
sive than once thought. One label for such helpers
is “toxin handler,” and the work that they do can be
summarized as “responding compassionately to
[colleagues experiencing emotional] pain in their
organization” (Frost, 2003: 62). An empirical study
of middle managers in an organization reported
that a number of them “formed a group that at-
tended to employees’ emotional needs” (Huy, 2005:
310). A study of 48 senior managers in Chinese
state-owned enterprises revealed that many of them
used positive emotional experiences to help col-
leagues adapt and be more productive (Krone &
Morgan, 2000).
Historically, it was trade unions that fostered a
culture whereby members helped each other deal
with problems, such as emotional distress, that af-
fected individuals’ well-being. The mutual-aid
logic of unionism emphasized community, family,
and caring, and provided a vocabulary for articu-
lating grievances against employers (Bacharach,
Bamberger, & Sonnenstuhl, 2001). As trade union-
ism in countries such as the US and the UK moved
toward a logic of bureaucratized servicing of mem-
bers through the negotiation of material gains, the
old ethos of mutual aid has tended to decline, al-
though there are signs of renewal in some indus-
tries (Bacharach et al., 2001). More generally, emo-
tional problems in the workplace have tended to
become issues for Human Resource departments to
deal with through such innovations as employee
assistance programs.
But HR departments cannot survey and control
all the discrepant emotions emerging in the myriad
of interactions taking place in modern service or-
ganizations. Nor can such departments anticipate
and deal with the spillover of negative emotions
into the workplace from crises in the home. Emo-
tions are created and reproduced through interac-
tions with other people, and these emotions are
subject to only limited control by bureaucracy
(Lawler et al., 2009: 9 –10). Negative emotions,
whether carried over from home or emerging in the
workplace, threaten productivity (Latané & Arro-
wood, 1963) and can spread across the organization
to affect other employees’ cooperation and work
performance (Barsade, 2002). Thus, in those organ-
izations in which being upbeat is seen as a job
requirement, there is likely to be active managerial
scrutiny of employees’ emotional states to prevent
disruption of organizational performance.
Some managers may take on the onerous task of
dealing with others’ negative emotions and become
martyrs to their own altruistic tendencies, often2013
Toegel, Kilduff, and Anand
suffering career problems in bureaucratic organiza-
tions ill-suited to emotional coping (Frost, 2003).
From this “caring” perspective, managers intervene
to help others solve their emotional problems out of
a personal desire to ease the sufferings of col-
leagues rather than because intervention is man-
dated by the managerial role (e.g., Martin, Knopoff,
& Beckman, 1998). Thus, emotion helping may be
framed by managers as a “gift” rather than an oblig-
atory aspect of the role (Bolton, 2005: 240).
OVERVIEW OF EMOTION HELPING
We used a case-based approach combined with
intensive reading of relevant literature to investi-
gate emotion helping in a recruiting agency. To
structure our findings, we foreshadow here the the-
oretical directions and questions that emerged. In
general, we found two different interpretations
concerning why managers engage in emotion help-
ing. Subordinates interpreted interventions by
managers to ameliorate others’ emotional pain as
in-role managerial behavior, given the potential for
negative emotions to adversely affect productivity.
In contrast, such interventions were often seen by
the managers themselves as extra-role behavior,
proceeding from intentions unrelated to managerial
role demands.
Four questions guided our research into emotion
helping. First, to what extent do managers actually
incorporate the emotion-helping function in their
repertoire of behaviors (cf. Toegel, Anand, &
Kilduff, 2007)? A related aspect of this first ques-
tion concerns whether some managers actively
monitor the emotional expressions of employees
and intervene when they notice that employees
look upset. Or does the management of emotions
require waiting for employees to request manage-
rial help, given that the vast majority of helping-
based interactions in organizations are initiated by
someone seeking help (Bamberger, 2009: 50)? Sec-
ond, what motivates managers to engage in the
potentially unpleasant task of intervening in the
management of others’ negative emotions?
A third issue concerns whether emotion helping
is seen as in-role or extra-role behavior by those
providing the care and those to whom it is provided
(cf. Dyne & LePine, 1998). Do managers and em-
ployees differ concerning whether managers, as
part of their jobs, are expected to engage in emotion
management? Relatedly, does the acceptance of
help for emotional problems require payback in the
form of the expenditure of personal resources (cf.
337
Bamberger, 2009), and do managers and employees
view this issue of reciprocity differently?
A fourth research question was prompted by our
emergent finding that managers and subordinates
differed as to whether emotion help could be con-
sidered extra-role behavior on the part of managers;
and our finding that managers and subordinates
also differed as to whether managerially provided
emotion help should be reciprocated. This question
involved investigating whether different types of
emotion helping prompted different outcomes from
discrepant interpretations on the part of managers
and subordinates. Thus, we categorized different
types of helping behaviors and examined how dis-
crepant interpretations of the helping behaviors led
to positive and negative outcomes.
Given that these interrelated questions have not
been addressed in prior theory, we build from re-
sults toward an emergent process model of when,
why, and how managers provide help with subor-
dinates’ negative emotions, as well as surfacing
both positive and negative outcomes from discrep-
ant interpretations concerning emotion helping.
METHODS
Site
We studied the head office of a recruiting agency
specializing in providing managerial staff for retail
outlets such as grocery stores. The company was
founded in 1988 by an entrepreneur who left his
job at an executive placement agency. In contrast to
its competitors, the company emphasized both ef-
ficiency of database management and effectiveness
of relationship building with prospective jobseek-
ers and the companies that hired them. Revenues
had tripled during the most recent four-year period,
while the number of full-time employees had dou-
bled to 67 (38 women, 29 men). As the largest
specialist retail recruitment agency in its market,
the company received about 500 original résumés
each week and was the largest classified advertiser
in the urban area in which it was located. Employee
turnover at the company was less than 5 percent a
year, compared to an industry average of close to 40
percent.
We were fortunate in establishing strong, trusting
relations with the members of this particular organ-
ization, and thereby achieved unusual access to
thoughts and feelings concerning managerial help-
ing interventions. Such access is a prerequisite for338
Academy of Management Journal
case-based theory building (Eisenhardt & Graeb-
ner, 2007).
Procedure
Emotion helping across ranks. We collected so-
cial network data concerning who went to whom
for emotion help to examine whether managers
(relative to subordinates) were more active in the
network. The data were collected as part of a larger
study by means of a questionnaire sent through
e-mail to all 67 employees. We assured respondents
that their responses would be confidential, and we
provided debriefing sessions following data collec-
tion. After two follow-up reminder e-mails, all 67
employees had responded concerning the network
data reported here.
To construct the emotion-helping network, we
collected information from respondents concerning
who helped them deal with their negative emo-
tions. On the questionnaire, respondents were
asked to look down an alphabetical roster of em-
ployees and indicate the people who helped them
deal with their negative emotions at work: “Please
look down the alphabetical list of your fellow em-
ployees and place a check mark to indicate all the
names of those people who you think help you
when you need support in times of trouble to cope
with your personal problems and your negative
emotions.”
To examine the extent to which lower-level em-
ployees tended to nominate those with higher lev-
els of managerial responsibility as emotion helpers,
we first used company records to categorize people
into three categories (high, middle, low) based on
their level of managerial responsibility. This cate-
gorization was checked and confirmed by the com-
pany’s CEO for accuracy. Then we calculated, for
each category, the extent of homophily; that is, the
extent to which people nominated same-category
others as those who helped manage and alleviate
their emotional distress. Of particular interest are
the adjusted homophily scores; that is, scores ad-
justed for the relative availability of people in dif-
ferent categories. What may appear as a tendency
on the part of people of a certain category to nom-
inate people of the same category may be attribut-
able to the proportionately higher number of peo-
ple of that category. Adjusted homophily scores
can range from ⫺1 (all nominations to those of a
different category) to ⫹1 (all nominations to those
of the same category). (See Krackhardt [1990] for an
April
example of this procedure, and Gower and Leg-
endre [1986] for complete details.)
Inductive qualitative study. In preparation for
systematic guided questioning, we interviewed five
employees (ranging from junior to senior, in terms
of hierarchical levels) to learn about job tasks and
the culture of the organization, shadowed a senior
consultant for one workday to observe patterns of
task-related and social interactions, observed a cus-
tomer-handling skills training session for junior
employees, and participated in many informal meet-
ings and conversations across the organization.
Of the 21 employees who worked in a managerial
capacity (including partners, senior consultants,
assignment managers, and supervisory administra-
tors), we interviewed 14 (6 men, 8 women). Some
managers were unavailable for interviews, because
they were involved in starting up a branch of the
firm in another city. Two individuals in the top
management level were interviewed on two differ-
ent occasions, once to provide an overall picture
or “grand tour” (cf. Spradley, 1979: 86 – 87) of the
organization’s business and its manner of function-
ing, and a second time to talk about emotion help.
We also interviewed the CEO multiple times. Given
the relatively large number of subordinates, we
used data saturation as the trigger to stop further
data collection (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). We found
that by the time we interviewed the 16th employee,
much of the information was repetitive. In all, we
interviewed 30 (14 men, 16 women) employees,
representing 45 percent of the headquarters’
personnel.
Interviews lasted about an hour, on average, and
followed a semistructured protocol (included in
the Appendix). We used a mixture of descriptive
and contrast questions (Spradley, 1979). We began
with a descriptive question asking participants to
tell us about a situation in which they experienced
stress, anxiety, tension, or emotional pain, and then
asked them to characterize the fellow employee or
any other person who helped them through the
experience (see the Appendix). We used contrast
questions such as “Does everybody in the firm pro-
vide such help or only some people?” We used
emerging themes from initial interviews to guide
data collection in subsequent ones.
To uncover the expectations and motivations of
organizational members requires a grounding in the
organization’s culture to produce a first-order anal-
ysis framed around the dominant themes expressed
by the participants (Gioia & Chittipeddi, 1991: 435).
A second-order commentary comes later, providing2013
Toegel, Kilduff, and Anand
a theoretical explanation of the themes that sur-
faced through interviews with employees and man-
agers. To provide the more dispassionate view re-
quired by a second-order commentary, we followed
prior work (e.g., Gioia, Thomas, Clark, & Chitti-
peddi, 1994) and employed two members of the
research team to conduct interviewers, and a third
person to help provide a retrospective, more objec-
tive analysis of the data.
Analysis of interview data. Figures 1 and 2
show the progression of the first-order analysis
leading to emergent themes concerning incongru-
ent expectations (Figure 1) and reciprocity (Figure
2). We used NVivo software (Richards, 1999) to
group together the different situations that our in-
formants described when they needed emotion
help, such as anxieties related to deadlines, fear of
not meeting monthly targets, death or illness of a
family member, or other domestic issues. We then
assembled groupings that related to similar issues
or relationships into broader aggregations of infor-
mant sensemaking (see the first column in Figures
1 and 2) and furnished these with an appropriate
339
informant-relevant label (e.g., first entry, first col-
umn in Figure 1: “emotion help is not in managers’
job description”). The next step was to compare the
data from different interviewees and to develop a
list of higher order analytic dimensions (Van
Maanen, 1988), complete with descriptors that fa-
cilitate theoretical analysis (e.g., second column in
Figure 1: “managers perceive emotion help to be
extra-role behavior”). Finally, we used data dis-
plays (cf. Miles & Huberman, 1994) to create more
general emergent themes (e.g., third column in Fig-
ure 1: “incongruence in the expectation of emotion
help”), useful for building the emergent theoreti-
cal model.
In presenting the results below, we numbered
our interviewees and provided information on their
rank in the organization to clarify precisely where
information was derived from. The quotes are la-
beled with the following categories: E-1 (employee
1); MM-1 (middle manager 1), and HLM-1 (high-
level manager 1). Informants that were interviewed
in our preparatory interviews are prefixed PI-1
(preparatory informant 1). We have provided an
FIGURE 1
Incongruent Expectations Concerning the Role of Emotion Help in Managerial Behavior
First-Order Analysis: Informant
Analytic Dimensions
Emergent Theme
Emotion help is not in managers’ job description
Quote: “ Providing [emotion] help is extra, it’s not in your job description.”
Emotion help as a voluntary, extra effort on managers’ part
Quote: “They [direct reports] should know that what I am doing [by way
of emotion help] is over and above my responsibilities as a manager.”
Managers perceive
emotion help to be
extra-role
behavior
Emotion help as an expression of disposition rather a managerial
job requirement
Quote: “It’s not part of my job, it’s me, the way I am.”
Emotion help is the “natural” responsibility of managers
Quote: “The role of the managers is to support and look after their staff. This would be
a natural thing to do.”
Managers should provide support for work-related emotional difficulty
Quote: “If it is a work-related emotional problem, then it is my
manager’s job to support me.”
Employees view
emotion help as
in-role behavior
of managers
Managers should help solve emotion-related problems
Quote: “[As a manager] you have to be approachable so that people can come and
say: ‘I have a problem.’ I had a manager like that before. While now, it is not really
[like that] here anymore [with respect to my supervisor].”
Incongruent
expectations of
emotion help340
Academy of Management Journal
April
FIGURE 2
Incongruent Expectations Concerning Reciprocity for Emotion Help
First-Order Analysis: Informant Sensemaking
Analytic Dimensions
Emergent Theme
Emotion help is not part of a manager’s job, hence other invokes reciprocity
Quote: “If it is not officially part of your manager’s job to help [you] through an
[emotionally difficult] situation, then there should be reciprocation other than
‘Oh, it’s part of your job to help me through this.’”
Managers expect
Managers can instrumentally expect greater commitment
reciprocation
Quote: “[By providing emotion help] you would get more commitment .... through
You build 100% loyalty and if I ask my people to do something over
commitment and
and above, it would be done.”
recognition
Recognition expected from subordinates for prosocially motivated help
Quote: “Providing emotion help is about the [warmth] you receive.”
No reciprocity should be expected
Quote: “Should there be any payback [for providing emotion help]? In an ideal
world—no.”
Limited and specific reciprocity
Quote: “There could be some payback on a personal level maybe. They
[managers] should be able to talk to you, as well as you would be able
to speak to them.”
Incongruent
expectations
concerning
reciprocity for
emotion help
Employees see no
need or limited
and specific
obligation to
reciprocate
Quote: “If your manager supports you emotionally, then you might
want to return the favor .... I am an emotion helper to my boss.”
extensive analysis of organizational culture, so as
to situate the results in the context of a typical,
albeit high-performing, service company.
RESULTS
Company Culture
The CEO recruited new employees through an
assessment center that used occupational personal-
ity questionnaires, resulting in the hiring of “very
like-minded and likeable” people (HLM-2). Job de-
scriptions were detailed and precise. The head of-
fice staff (the focus of our study) worked in a series
of town houses in a residential area of the city. All
employees other than the CEO occupied desks in
open-plan rooms in full view of colleagues, mean-
ing that any behavior, including help-seeking be-
havior, was likely to be fully exposed to others. One
of the managers commented concerning the visibil-
ity of workplace activity: “We all know exactly
what each other is billing. It’s very open, there are
financial spreadsheets we all look at, we have ac-
cess to. Nothing is hidden” (MM-1). The atmo-
sphere was friendly and collegial, with one em-
ployee commenting as follows concerning social
interaction: “A lot of friendships are formed, a lot
of relationships are formed through the company as
well in terms of people popping off and getting
married” (E-14).
Recruitment consultants interacted mainly with
three sets of people: work-team colleagues, clients
(i.e., representatives of retailers seeking skilled
workers), and job candidates. A junior consultant
said that she had become “ruthless” at “seeing
when I can help candidates and when I can’t” (PI-
1). A senior consultant reported that the most crit-
ical skill that she needed was “emotional intelli-
gence and being able to read people” (MM-7) while
interviewing them. Emotional regulation was also
important— consultants were expected to present
themselves as calm and composed while interact-
ing with clients. The CEO reinforced these expec-
tations in training seminars by recollecting an epi-
sode in which he “exchanged some fairly sharp
words” with a client, and why losing control of his
emotions in this way was detrimental to business.
On the day of the work-shadowing, one senior con-
sultant was observed spending about 20 minutes2013
Toegel, Kilduff, and Anand
repairing her make-up and grooming herself ahead
of a luncheon meeting with a client, noting: “I’ve
got to put my best face on” (HLM-6).
The CEO described himself as efficient, orga-
nized, and meticulous; this was borne out in our
observations of him. He regarded his main achieve-
ment as bringing a systematic approach to recruit-
ing involving measurement, control, and testing. In
particular, a computer program tracked precisely
how many interviews with potential job placement
candidates each recruitment consultant achieved:
“The computer will spit it out. Because everything
they [the recruiters] do goes through the system.”
The company had no special assistance programs
or chaplains to help employees with their emo-
tional distress. During the first wave of interviews,
we asked if there should be a formal role of emotion
helper in the organization. Sixty percent of respon-
dents disagreed. One of them commented, “If they
[employees] can talk to whoever, it’s better than
having to go to one person” (E-3).
Internal promotion was carefully monitored in
this organization. One of the employees reflected
on the internal exams that measured promotability:
“There is a very explicit documented process for
the way of working. . . . There are four grades,
A–D. . . . I’m due to take on a C grade exam next
month. You have certain criteria which are in the
terms and conditions which everyone is aware
of. . . . The exam itself is a written exam and then is
checked to see if you know what you are talking
about” (PI-1). Another employee added, “There are
a lot of internal courses. . . . All that time you are
assessed and you have a weekly review meeting
with your own mentor and you have monthly re-
views with the divisional directors” (PI-2). Formal
mentoring meetings focused on performance feed-
back and organizational problem solving rather
than on social or emotional support. Indeed, the
CEO described how such performance feedback
could be used to deal with “trouble makers” who
didn’t “believe in the way we run the system”:
We know we place roughly 10 or 11 percent of the
people we interview. So do the math. Ten or 11
percent of 100 candidates interviewed is more than
10 or 11 percent of 50 candidates interviewed. It’s
about activity. It always has been, always will be.
Get over it. When we go back to these trouble mak-
ers, they are the ones that want to interview less.
They don’t believe in the way we run the system. So
they start telling others, “Don’t do it the [company]
way, do it this way.” We have to crush them. . . . You
can’t win all hearts and minds. (CEO)
341
The CEO also commented on the importance of
managing negative emotions in the workplace, as
follows: “If you have negative feelings, if you got
people working in a way that they don’t like each
other, in a sales environment it is fatal. Then they
work to hurt each other. That means hurting each
others’ sales as well. . . . That needs managing very
carefully.”
Sources of Negative Emotion
Our informants reported that managers had
helped them with a variety of negative emotional
experiences encompassing both personal and pro-
fessional realms of life. Approximately 70 percent
of our respondents reported that they expected
their managers to provide them with emotion help.
Asked to give examples of cases in which they
needed emotional support, interviewees recounted
times when negative emotions were prompted by
incidents outside of work such as “a negative situ-
ation with my husband” (MM-5) and times when
negative emotions were prompted by work-related
incidents such as “going through a promotion . . .
[when] I had massive amount of client work” (MM-
1). Respondents also mentioned job-related anxiet-
ies concerning deadlines, not meeting monthly tar-
gets, change of work roles, and difficult direct
reports. Respondents reported that emotion help-
ing was particularly evident on Mondays, at the
time of monthly performance appraisals, and dur-
ing the months of January and September, when
work tended to build up. About half of the situa-
tions reported were related to personal issues. Re-
spondents mentioned incidents such as illness and
death of a family member, and one employee re-
called: “Three months ago, I split with my boy-
friend and it was horrendous. . . . I was just falling
apart and it was awful. I couldn’t concentrate at all”
(E-6). Most employees were stressed at work as a
result of both work-related problems and problems
occurring outside the workplace. Only one inter-
viewee said, “I don’t deal with emotional issues at
work” (HLM-7). Later in the interview, he men-
tioned that psychosomatic problems had driven
him to seek outside counseling.
Research Question 1: Emotion
Helping across the Ranks
Did managers incorporate emotion helping in
their repertoire of behaviors? The results in Table
1 show that managers did indeed incorporate emo-342
Academy of Management Journal
TABLE 1
Extent of Homophily in the Provision of Emotion Help
by Managerial Rank a
Rank n Mean s.d.
High level
Middle level
Low level 8
13
46 .43 (.65)
.14 (.44)
ⴚ.03 (.61) .17
.18
.18
a
Mean values indicate the extent to which emotion helping
behavior was received from people of the same rank, with pos-
itive scores indicating within-rank helping and negative scores
indicating cross-rank helping. Bold values are adjusted to take
account of the relative number of people in the rank, whereas
values in parentheses are unadjusted. All means differ signifi-
cantly from one another at p ⬍ .05.
tion helping into their repertoire of behaviors in
this particular organization. (Note that every man-
ager received at least one nomination as an emotion
helper, with one manager receiving 29 nomina-
tions.) The values in Table 1 show, for each rank,
the extent of homophily; that is, the extent to which
people nominated same-rank others as those who
helped manage and alleviate their emotional dis-
tress. The bolded values are homophily scores ad-
justed for the relative availability of people in dif-
ferent ranks.
Table 1 shows that those in the highest manage-
rial rank tended to be helped by colleagues of the
same rank (as shown by the positive adjusted ho-
mophily score of .43), whereas those in the lowest
rank (who had no managerial responsibilities)
tended to be helped by people from other ranks (as
indicated by the negative score of ⫺.03). People of
middle managerial rank were similar to those of
high rank in their likelihood to turn to those of the
same rank for help with emotional problems, al-
though the strength of this tendency was lower
(adjusted homophily ⫽ .14). All of the means were
significantly different from one another (p ⬍ .05).
Whereas employees at the lowest level of manage-
rial responsibility nominated managers at the high-
est level of responsibility 36 times as emotion help-
ers, there were only 2 nominations in the other
direction (from the highest level to the low-
est level).
There was, therefore, little crosscutting recipro-
cation with respect to emotion helping. One lower-
level employee explained that managers tended to
“expect reciprocation on a commitment level” (E-
10) in return for providing emotion help, rather
than expecting reciprocation in terms of ameliorat-
ing managers’ negative emotions. One middle man-
April
ager stated that, “I hope my subordinates have said
. . . to my boss that I have helped them” (MM-5).
One of the few middle managers who did have a
mutual helping relationship with his boss ex-
plained, “I would talk about personal issues with
[him]. We had worked together for two years and
we had developed a friendship relation” (MM-3).
Thus, between middle and top managers, recipro-
cal emotion helping was possible because of an
established friendship relation. However, the more
usual situation was reflected in the comments of
one of the top managers who stated that, “I don’t
think managers expect direct reports to provide
emotional support to them” (HLM-7).
When was emotion help provided? Thus, in par-
tial answer to our first research question, we found
that 75 percent of lower-level employees and 71
percent of middle managers reported receiving
emotion help by those higher in the hierarchy. A
second aspect of the first research question con-
cerned whether managers were actively involved in
intervening to proffer help with others’ emotional
problems, or whether managers waited for employ-
ees to request help. To structure the remaining
findings concerning managerial helping behavior,
we summarize in Figure 3 the emergent process
model. The dotted line across the first half of the
model separates motives and behaviors relating to
solicited and unsolicited emotion help.
Our data suggest that help was solicited by em-
ployees from those managers who appeared partic-
ularly accessible. As one subordinate stated: “The
best thing [for managers] to do is to be approach-
able” (E-1). One manager, who emphasized that she
tried to motivate her subordinates when they were
feeling down, suggested that the subordinates
weren’t always in touch with their negative emo-
tions, but that they approached her for clarification
of what they were feeling: “without realizing it . . .
they are frustrated” (MM-5).
Some employees were reluctant to reveal how
problems were affecting their emotions at work.
The interview data show that 7 of the 14 managers
were proactive in overcoming this reluctance on
the part of employees to solicit help with emotions.
Thus, as Figure 3 summarizes, such managers ac-
tively scanned the workplace for signs of unhappy
workers, as indicated by this manager:
I can very often pre-empt things. You can see that
someone is not very happy or is a bit quiet and then
approach them. It’s not that everybody feels com-
fortable with coming to you. But it’s just saying “Is
there something wrong?” If they say “No,” that’s2013
Toegel, Kilduff, and Anand
343
FIGURE 3
Management Emotion Helping and Discrepant Role Attributions
Why?
Managerial
motives for
helping
When?
Prosocial and
instrumental
managerial
motives
Perceived
accessibility
of manager
Managers’
proactivity:
•
•
Scans
workplace
for
unhappy
workers
Offers to
help those
in distress
Instrumental
managerial
motives:
•
•
•
Rational and
self-interested
Anticipated
rewards
Impression
management
fine; I have offered my support but they don’t want
it. But often people don’t like to be needy. Espe-
cially if you are introverted, you like to keep your
emotions to yourself. (MM-3)
Another manager explained that, “I generally go to
people when I see they are distressed. I say, ‘let’s
talk for a couple of minutes, let’s have a cup of tea.’
I try not to draw attention” (HLM-1). This view was
echoed by a senior consultant, who stated: “Most
people prefer to feel that their manager cares for
them and has noticed that they are not themselves
or things are not going quite right, and just to say,
‘Are you OK?’” (E-10). The managers who were
active in emotion helping seemed to have their
antennae tuned to emotional distress among their
subordinates and initiated interactions when they
spotted such distress. One subordinate described
the proactivity of managerial emotion helpers as
follows: “They push you a little bit to speak about
it: ‘How are you? How are you feeling?’ They ask
why I am stressed, why I am upset, and listen to my
moaning” (E-4).
Helping
interaction
takes place?
Subordinate
self-discloses,
manager
responds
Manager
intervenes,
subordinate
self-discloses
Discrepant
role
attributions?
Manager
sees
managerial help
as extra-role:
Reciprocation
expected in the
form of
commitment,
personal loyalty.
Subordinate
sees
managerial help
as in-role: Little
or no
reciprocation
required.
Manager
intervenes,
subordinate
refuses help
Research Question 2: Why Did Managers Help
with Employees’ Negative Emotions?
Our second research question (mirrored in the
second heading in Figure 3) concerns the motiva-
tions of managers for providing emotion help. Two
basic motives of managers who acted as “emotion
helpers” emerged from the study. First, there was a
tendency among one set of managers to view the
provision of emotion help in an instrumental man-
ner. These managers thought that organizational
and economic benefits would accrue from helping
others cope with their negative emotions, because
“the emotional side does affect the money, the
sales, and the profits” and “if you provide emo-
tional support, you’ll get a return on that” (MM-3).
According to one of the managers:
To a certain degree, there’s self-interest there. I don’t
want that people leave, or I don’t want them to be
really low or down at work, because this will have
negative impact on me. I like to have a very positive
environment. I want people around me to be posi-344
Academy of Management Journal
tive, and if people are very negative or down, it rubs
off on everybody else. . . . (MM-5)
Another high-ranking manager commented: “I have
to [provide emotion help], otherwise it [negative
emotion] will spread like fire” (HLM-7).
Managers taking an instrumental view of emo-
tion help expected their investment in the well-
being of their subordinates to be reciprocated with
commitment and recognition, as shown in Figure 2,
which summarizes the emergent themes concern-
ing reciprocity. A second and more prosocial mo-
tive for emotion help characterized managers who
expressed “curiosity” about their colleagues. Such
managers tended to make dispositional attributions
about themselves; for example: “[Providing emo-
tion help] is not part of my job, it’s me, the way I
am . . .” (MM-5). The same female manager com-
mented that her motivation to help others through
difficult emotions came from “being a little bit
nosy.” She liked to know “what is going on and to
get involved.” Another one made it clear, “It makes
my job really interesting, because I have interest in
people and this [type of interaction] stimulates me”
(MM-4). As another manager stated, “You have to
know what makes your employees tick, and it helps
to know what happens in people’s lives outside
work, to understand how their mind works” (MM-
3). Managers in the social motivation group tended
to suggest that providing emotion support to others
was an important skill that could be used in other
areas of life. One remarked that it was good to
practice such supportive behavior because this
might help the struggle to cope with “negativity in
general.” One manager spoke about emotion help
being in line with “the Christian spirit,” and added,
“It’s the right thing to do” (HLM-1). To the extent
that prosocial motives were mentioned by manag-
ers, these tended to be associated with cases in
which employees solicited emotion help, as indi-
cated in Figure 3.
Managers who expressed social rather than in-
strumental motives, however, also nurtured the cal-
culative expectation that they would gain some-
thing back from the provision of emotion help—
recognition of their efforts from subordinates. As
one midranking manager noted:
When . . . I have helped them [and enabled them to]
focus [on their task], and if they start achieving
[their job goals], what delights me is the recognition:
Recognition in the sense that they know that I
helped them. They have probably said something to
my boss [about the fact] that I helped them. And
April
although he [my boss] might not say anything to me
like “Thank you for talking to that person,” what I
like about [it is] the recognition and warmth that
you get from people. (MM-2)
The emergent themes in Figure 2 also show a dis-
crepancy with respect to how employees viewed
managerial reciprocity expectations. Employees
tended to insist they were under little or no obliga-
tion to reciprocate managerial helping. We take up
this incongruence between managerial and em-
ployee expectations next.
Research Question 3:
Discrepant Role Expectations
As Figure 3 shows (under the heading “Helping
interaction takes place?”), in some cases of mana-
gerial intervention, employees refused help, and
therefore the process stopped. As in the example
reported above, managers sometimes offered sup-
port but found that their subordinates didn’t want
it. In all other cases, the managers provided help,
whether this was first solicited by employees
or not.
Did managers consider emotion helping to be
part of their required job duties? The answer to
the first part of our third research question is that
managers typically regarded such activity as discre-
tionary and outside of their mandated roles, as the
second column in Figure 1 shows. Help with neg-
ative emotions was not considered by the managers
to be part of their job description but was seen as
something “extra,” as a “voluntary” effort arising
from an underlying disposition rather than from an
organizational requirement. As one manager ex-
plained concerning the tendency to provide emo-
tion help on a discretionary basis: “My subordi-
nates should not think that’s what I’m there for. . . .
People in other companies don’t feel comfortable
talking to their manager [about their emo-
tions]” (MM-3).
Thus, in the words of one manager, subordinates
“should know what I am doing [by way of provid-
ing emotion help] is over and above my responsi-
bilities as a manager” (HLM-7). Managers perceived
their emotion helping to be extra-role behavior. But
this view differed from those of subordinates. As
the bottom panel in Figure 1 shows, subordinates
tended to see managerial interventions to provide
emotion help as part of the “natural” responsibility
of managers, particularly in the case of work-re-
lated emotional problems. Thus, employees viewed2013
Toegel, Kilduff, and Anand
emotion help as in-role behavior on the part of
managers. For some employees, the expectation ex-
tended to help with emotion problems in the work-
place that originated from difficulties outside of
work, as the following quotation from one of the
subordinates indicates:
I had a big problem at home. I was feeling very
unsettled. I had bottled up my emotions. In this
situation when you are looking for help it tends to
be someone . . . you consider a friend. . . . Or
someone who is quite senior, in a supervisory role,
and it is their duty in a sense to ask everybody
whether they are ok and how they are coping. That’s
their job, really. . . . They need to make sure that you
are OK in general. This responsibility comes with
their job. (E-4)
Subordinates’ tendencies to see emotion help as
expected in-role behavior on the part of managers
was reinforced by the proactivity of some manag-
ers. Managers who actively sought out those in
emotional distress rather than passively waiting to
be asked for help might have created the impres-
sion that such emotion helping was an expected
part of managerial job performance.
Subordinates generally expected their managers
to help them cope with negative emotion. A junior
consultant remarked that “Being a manager is not
just about setting targets—it’s about making sure
that people achieve their highest potential. You
can’t do that without [providing] emotional sup-
port” (E-1). Most of the subordinates suggested they
would “expect a sympathetic ear,” because “the
role of the manager is to support and look after his
staff and [providing emotion help] would be a nat-
ural thing to do” (E-7). Some of the direct reports
differentiated between personal and work-related
problems, suggesting “If I have real problems at
home, and they bring down my performance, it’s
not my manager’s job to support me, but if they are
work-related, then it is her job” (E-8).
Did the receipt of emotion help require recip-
rocation? Owing to differences in perceived role
definitions, some subordinates felt either no need
or limited and specific obligation to repay their
managers for the emotion help they received (see
summary of emergent themes in the bottom half of
Figure 2). The former, “no obligation,” view was
justified by the argument that managers who
helped subordinates with their negative emotions
were amply repaid by the organization. For exam-
ple, one subordinate argued as follows: “[The man-
ager] gets his bonus as a result of the work of the
345
team. He benefits if the team is happy and is work-
ing well. That’s where he gets his reward from”
(E-5). Another subordinate commented: “They
[managers] are helping themselves,” because “the
cost of not providing any sort of [emotional] sup-
port is greater than the cost of providing that sup-
port” (E-8). One of the low-ranking individuals
reckoned, “It is less in the interest of the subordi-
nate to help the manager, because if the team sales
increase and the manager is happier, but my sales
remain constant, it is a waste of my time to make
sure that the manager is OK” (E-9).
A subordinate of the manager with the highest
score in the emotion-helping network gave the fol-
lowing account: “I genuinely think that he [my
manager] is a nice bloke. You don’t get the idea that
he is doing it [emotion helping] from a business
perspective. He always gave me the impression that
he was doing it purely to help me personally. The
business result was as a result of the fact that he
had helped me personally, wanting to make my life
a bit easier. Genuinely, he is that sort of guy, it’s his
personality. A lot of people probably say that about
him inside and outside the company” (MM-1). The
respective manager, on the other hand, self-attrib-
uted a more instrumental motive: “It’s in my inter-
est to tackle this issue. I could benefit from it,
because there could be something that could affect
my team. I get bonuses for what we achieve”
(HLM-1).
Some subordinates professed a limited and spe-
cific obligation view, expecting that the receipt of
emotion help should be reciprocated in the same
way. As one subordinate noted: “I am an emotional
helper to my boss” (E-12). None of the subordinates
interviewed mentioned owing commitment, loy-
alty, and extra productivity that some managers
had expected of them. But to the extent that subor-
dinates themselves approached managers for help,
they tended to attribute prosocial motives to the
managers.
Research Question 4: Patterns of Emotion Help
and Outcomes from Discrepant Expectations
How was help provided? Managers exhibited a
range of helping tactics. Based on classifying man-
agerial activities from interview reports from those
who were helped, Table 2 shows, for each of the
managers people mentioned as active in providing
help, whether or not each manager engaged in lis-
tening (representing 27% of the comments on how
helped was provided); validating (36%); reframing346
Academy of Management Journal
April
TABLE 2
Types of Emotion Help a
Manager Listening
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Provision of emotion help b X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
27%
Validating: Empathy
and Ego-Strengthening
X
X
X
X
X
X
Reframing
X
X
Transforming
X
X
X
X
Advising
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
36%
18%
9%
10%
a
Only those managers indicated as providing emotional help to colleagues are included in this table. “X” indicates that a manager was
reported as providing this type of emotion help to a colleague.
b
The percentage of comments relating to provision of emotion help.
(18%); transforming (9%); and advising (10%).
Thus, to take the example of the single manager
listed under the category “transforming through
positivity,” three different subordinates referred to
this particular manager as providing this kind of
help. There were eight other comments concerning
this tactic, but they were not associated with any
particular individual manager.
With respect to the first aspect of emotion help—
listening—the interviews revealed that, irrespec-
tive of whether emotional problems could be traced
to personal issues or work situations, all emotion
helpers provided a “listening ear” to those troubled
by negative emotions. As one subordinate said
about her manager: “Basically, he just sits there and
listens to you” (E-5). Another one described this
emotion helping interaction as letting people “get
the problem off the chest” (E-4). There were also
indications that emotion helpers sometimes role-
modeled self-disclosure and emotion awareness, as
reported by this subordinate: “He opened himself
and this allowed me to open myself more and let
out a lot of this stuff that you usually don’t talk
about” (E-3).
As Table 2 indicates, just under half of the help-
ers helped validate employee emotions by provid-
ing an empathic environment that strengthened
self-confidence. Such helpers were described by
employees as “big-hearted” and as “creating
warmth.” The process of validation involved pro-
viding reassurance concerning how individuals
saw themselves. As the comment from one direct
report suggests, “He gave me the confidence that I
could cope” (MM-1).
Those in the grip of negative emotions were (as
Table 2 shows) encouraged by some emotion help-
ers to “reframe” emotions through a process of re-
flection and the reorganization of experience in
new narratives. Reframing was described (by the
helpers) in terms of helping people to “step away
from their problems” (E-2), to see “both sides of the
story” (E-11), to see “the whole picture” (E-9), “to
refocus” (E-3), and “to come back to rational think-
ing” (E-7). From the perspective of those suffering
negative emotions, this emotion work was de-
scribed as helping people “look at the problem
from a third-party view” (E-4), “put everything in
perspective” (E-9), and “see the wood from the
trees” (HLM-2).
Emotion transformation is about changing nega-
tive emotions into positive ones. In total, 11 com-
ments were made describing this tactic, but for 8 of
these comments the name of the helper was not
indicated. Three of the comments could be clearly
attributed to HLM-1, because interviewees explic-
itly mentioned his name. A subordinate noted that
HLM-1 was “quite humorous and funny” (E-3), an-
other mentioned that, “we laugh and I feel much
better” (E-5), and a third one commented that this
emotion helper was able to “sell ideas in a positive
way” (E-11). Finally, the majority of the managers
in our sample engaged in providing advice to those2013
Toegel, Kilduff, and Anand
suffering from negative emotions. As one manager
described this process: “I say don’t worry about
that—this is what you can do” (MM-6).
Emotion helping and outcomes of discrepant
expectations. First, we should note that managers
viewed their helping efforts as effective in prevent-
ing negative emotional contagion across teams, in
promoting performance and sales, and in improv-
ing work atmosphere. We choose not to focus on
these outcomes, given that they have been well
established in prior research. In keeping with our
fourth research question, we focused on outcomes
of discrepant expectations between managers and
subordinates with respect to roles and reciprocity.
Overall, two general patterns of emotion helping
emerged from our data, as illustrated in Figure 4.
The first, short-cut, pattern involved managers lis-
tening to subordinates and often providing advice.
Listening and advice giving were universally re-
garded by subordinates as standard aspects of man-
agers’ jobs, so the likelihood of discrepancies con-
cerning expectations of reciprocity for such help
was high. The second pattern of emotion helping
followed a more elaborated route that involved not
347
just listening and advising, but also more extensive
involvement that included one or more of the fol-
lowing: validating, reframing, and transforming.
This elaborated pattern of managerial helping was
likely to prompt feelings of gratitude on the part of
those receiving help. Indeed, as Figure 4 shows, the
short-cut and elaborated patterns were distin-
guished in that the elaborated pattern prompted
outcomes that were in addition to those prompted
by the short-cut pattern.
Figure 4 summarizes our finding that both pat-
terns of emotion helping by managers related to a
positive outcome for managers: attributions by sub-
ordinates of leadership qualities to managers. The
expectation on the part of subordinates that man-
agers should provide emotion help was related to
the widely shared prototype of the emotion helper
as “someone with experience and seniority” (E-4).
One interviewee described emotion helpers as
“more experienced and gregarious colleagues who
are more wise about life in general” (E-2). One
junior employee said about his manager, “I look up
to him and see him more as a father figure” (E-3),
whereas another employee commented concerning
FIGURE 4
Emergent Model of How Two Patterns of Managerial Helping Relate to Outcomes of
Discrepant Expectations
How is help provided?
Outcomes of discrepant expectations?
Positive
Shortcut:
•
•
Listening
Advising
Elaborated Pattern:
• Listening
•
•
• Validating
Reframing
Transforming
through positivity
•
Advising
Managers
Attribution of leadership
qualities
Subordinates
Emotion help without
indebtedness
Dark Side
Managers
Disappointment,
perceived breach of reciprocal
exchange
Subordinates
Distrust of managers who are
seen as offering help as part of
their managerial role
Managers
Receipt of subordinate
expressions of gratitude, but
only in cases where exceptional
help is provided Managers
Significant stress, burnout, and
disappointment in the absence of
reciprocity; anxiety about
creating employee dependence
Subordinates
Perception of supportive
organizational work climate Subordinates
Worry about possible damage to
relationships with managers348
Academy of Management Journal
her relationship with her manager: “She is very
maternal” (E4). A positive outcome of the role dis-
crepancy, then, for managers was that, because
managerial emotion helping behaviors (whether
short-cut or elaborated) were seen by subordinates
as in-role, managers active in this role tended to be
attributed qualities such as wisdom, and tended to
be looked up to as inspiring figures.
For subordinates, granting wisdom and parental
qualities to managers may have helped relieve sub-
ordinates from the necessity of repaying indebted-
ness in other ways. Further, employees who re-
ceived the more elaborated set of helping behaviors
regarded the overall organizational work climate as
supportive because of the attention their personal
problems received from managers. For example,
one subordinate argued as follows: “It doesn’t take
genius to figure out that when you step into an
office and everyone is happy, there has to be an
emotional network in there. It’s a very open,
friendly company. You feel like you are part of one
small company where everyone gets on. . . . [It]
does build relationships, it’s a very good thing”
(E-14). Another subordinate commented: “If people
are working in that kind of environment, they are
probably much more likely to remain working in
that environment” (E-9).
There was gratitude expressed to the emotion
helper with the most elaborated pattern (HLM-1)
for the extensive help he provided, but such ex-
pressions were exceptional. Thus, one of his sub-
ordinates noted: “I have fed it back to him on a
couple of occasions, but for the other guys, I don’t
think I would make a conscious effort of thanking
them for their support as such” (MM-1). Typically,
managers and direct reports alike were aware that
incongruent expectations and incongruent recipro-
cation caused disappointment. Managers who pro-
vided either the short-cut or the more elaborated
pattern of helping tended to feel “let down and
disappointed” (MM-3) at what they perceived to be
breaches of expected reciprocity. For managers
who provided only short-cut help, there was un-
happiness at the perceived lack of gratitude. As one
middle manager expressed it: “Managing people is
a thankless job. I know how well thank you goes
down, but you very rarely get it for yourself” (MM-
3). One consequence of processing the negative
emotions of others through the more elaborated
pattern of helping was that “You do get stressed out
and take it home with you. One is definitely suffer-
ing as a result of this” (MM-2). Managers providing
such extensive help recognized that “they could be
April
relied upon too heavily” which could “take its toll
on you” (HLM-2).
The following incident recounted by a manager
illustrates the disappointment when subordinate
reciprocation failed to materialize.
There was a member of staff who was going through
problems outside work and I spent a lot of time with
her to try and get her through it at work as well as
give her emotional support. And when she was turn-
ing the corner, she said “I am leaving [the firm],”
which was completely out of the blue to me. I must
admit my initial reaction was “Oh, I feel really let
down. I have put a lot of work into you as an indi-
vidual on a personal basis.” A couple of days later
she said, “You don’t seem very happy for me.” I
said, “I am happy for you, but I feel actually a bit let
down and disappointed that you resigned.” And it
was only then that she realized, “Oh, I didn’t think
about that,” because probably she thought it’s my
job. . . . Direct reports sometimes do not realize [that
it is not part of my job]. Or take it for granted. They
do think it is part of your job. (MM-3)
Continuing with the negative side of the ledger
summarized in Figure 4, managers mentioned the
tendency for employees in receipt of extensive
emotion help (which was assumed by subordinates
to be available as part of the managerial role) to
become overly dependent. One manager joked that
she had become “the agony aunt” (MM-5) for a
couple of her direct reports. Subordinates were
concerned about another potentially negative out-
come: that opening up to a manager concerning
emotional problems might damage them in the
manager’s eyes, leading to a lowering of the subor-
dinate-manager relationship. Managers proffering
help were seen by subordinates quite differently
than the managers saw themselves: not as col-
leagues going beyond their expected roles but as
bosses doing their jobs. This discrepancy in how
emotion help was viewed contributed to a lack of
trust. One of the employees, for example, explained
that he was reluctant to approach his manager for
any kind of emotion help because “I don’t want
him to think that I am weak” (E-6). Given these
discrepant views, bringing negative feelings to the
attention of supervisors was seen by subordinates
as fraught with risk, as one middle manager under-
stood: “Some people might think it’s for weak peo-
ple and they might get labeled by very narrow-
minded managers as weak” (MM-2). A senior
manager was concerned that emotion helping
could lead to the impairment of relationships be-
cause of this destruction of trust: “Some people are2013
Toegel, Kilduff, and Anand
very suspicious, because . . . knowing these things
[emotional issues] is going to be a benefit [for the
emotion helper]” (HLM-6). There was, then, evi-
dence that employees did not wholly trust manag-
ers to be recipients of personal information that
might portray the employees as emotionally weak.
Summary of Results
Organizational members were under scrutiny not
just from computer systems tracking the pace of
work but also from each other, in terms of the
monitoring of negative emotions related to both
work and nonwork problems. Managers, as a group,
tended to provide emotion help not only to each
other but also to their subordinates. Managers were
active in monitoring the emotions of subordinates
and intervening to offer help. Managers’ motiva-
tions were self-described as instrumental rather
than altruistic. But managers active in the provi-
sion of emotion help tended to conceive of such
help as extra-role behavior “over and above” their
duties. Managers expected employees to recipro-
cate with commitment and personal loyalty. Sub-
ordinates on the other hand, defined emotional
support as managerial in-role behavior and mostly
resisted any obligations of reciprocation. As Figure
4 illustrates, discrepant role expectations contrib-
ute both positive and negative outcomes. Looking
at the positive side of the ledger, discrepant expec-
tations tend to result in managers being attributed
leadership qualities by subordinates who assume
emotion-helping managers are simply exceptional
role models. These attributions help relieve subor-
dinates of feelings of personal indebtedness for
help received, and help create a supportive organ-
izational climate in cases where subordinates re-
ceive elaborated help. On the negative side of the
ledger, discrepant expectations are likely to leave
managers feeling disappointed at the lack of reci-
procity and (in the case of managers providing
more elaborated help) feeling stressed from deliv-
ering emotion helping in the absence of reciprocity.
Subordinates in turn worry about possible damage
to their relationships with managers if they receive
emotion help from those above them in the hierar-
chy. Subordinates also may develop dependence
on heroic managers who provide the elaborated
type of help but are perceived not to require
reciprocation.
349
DISCUSSION
Our analysis proceeds from bases in both critical
theory and work psychology to forge a new under-
standing of the micropolitics of organizational
work. In particular, our study surfaces discrepant
interpretations of managers’ provision of emotion
help. To date, research has focused on antecedents
of good citizenship behavior (e.g., Bowler & Brass,
2006; Settoon & Mossholder, 2002; Spitzmuller,
Van Dyne, & Ilies, 2008), with some research atten-
tion to the consequences for those providing such
behavior. Thus, providers of OCBs achieve higher
performance evaluations and greater managerial re-
ward allocations (Podsakoff, Whiting, Podsakoff, &
Blume, 2009) but may suffer overload, stress, and
work-family conflicts (Bolino & Turnley, 2005;
Frost, 2003; Frost & Robinson, 1999). Research has
neglected the possibility of incongruence between
those providing such help and those receiving it,
although we do know that supervisors and their
subordinates differ concerning what is considered
OCB on the part of subordinates (Morrison, 1994).
What is striking in our findings is that both par-
ties—the employees and the managers—accepted
the necessity of controlling negative emotions for
the good of the organization, in line with the gen-
eral, positive-psychology emphasis on positivity
and compassionate social relationships (Cameron,
Dutton, & Quinn, 2003). In the open-plan offices,
people easily monitored each other, and it was
possible therefore for managers to notice if subor-
dinates looked upset. The norms in this service
culture seemed to permit managers to intervene
without having to wait for subordinates to explic-
itly ask for help.
The discrepancy between employees and manag-
ers centers on the issue of whether such managerial
help should be considered part and parcel of the
managerial role. The employees indicated that
managers were attributed parental powers and seen
as beneficent and wise guardians, whose ministra-
tions were expected as a matter of course by needy
recipients. Managers did not report perceiving
themselves as parental figures but indicated that
they responded to situational demands—such as
the sight of a suffering employee— by going beyond
their expected managerial responsibilities. Particu-
larly in the case of managers who frequently inter-
vene to offer unsolicited help, good citizenship
behavior is likely to be viewed as part of the indi-
vidual’s job and not as anything extra (Bergeron,
2007; Van Dyne, Cummings, & McLean Parks,350
Academy of Management Journal
1995). Given that employees are typically unable to
directly reciprocate by providing emotion help to
managers, employees are likely to resist seeing
emotion help as anything other than normal work-
place interaction.
Thus, whereas those who were helped tended to
perceive their helpers as doubly powerful figures—
invested both with formal authority as managers
and with the mantle of parental authority—the
helpers saw themselves as opportunistically react-
ing to situational contingencies to do favors for
subordinates in need. Exchange relationships suf-
fer when one party fails to reciprocate (Cotterell,
Eisenberger, & Speicher, 1992). In the case of emo-
tion help, we found incongruence: managers ex-
pected reciprocity in terms of commitment and loy-
alty, but subordinates failed to recognize their
obligation. Indeed, in the one case in which a man-
ager went to considerable lengths to help a suffer-
ing subordinate manage her problems outside of
work, the subordinate responded, once the prob-
lems were ameliorated, by promptly resigning. Em-
ployees simply failed to acknowledge their obliga-
tions to reciprocate the help provided by managers.
Employees tended to interpret managers’ interven-
tions as self-interested, and saw the provision of
emotion help as an expected part of the manage-
rial role.
Our model suggests the paradox that helping be-
havior designed to ameliorate negative emotions
may itself generate negative emotions on the part of
managers waiting in vain for employees to repay
their kindness with personal loyalty. Managers in
these high emotional labor settings may expect em-
ployees to see their efforts as prosocial, organiza-
tional citizenship–type behaviors and expect em-
ployees to show gratitude. Employees, on their
side, are likely to attribute managers’ helping be-
haviors to the general culture of the organization
rather than to reciprocate with loyalty to specific
managers (Eisenberger et al., 2010). Disconfirma-
tion of managers’ expectations can result in a range
of negative emotions such as anxiety, insecurity,
and helplessness (Rimé, 2007: 473). From the em-
ployee perspective, the amelioration of negative
emotions is likely to require much more than the
empathic listening provided by the majority of
managers: simply encouraging people to talk about
their negative emotions has been shown to be “ir-
relevant to emotional recovery” (Rimé, 2007: 470).
Therefore, our emergent model suggests that in-
congruence— concerning how emotion help is
viewed and whether reciprocation is required—
April
fuels negative (as well as positive) outcomes in
organizations. For managers, negative outcomes in-
clude disappointment and increased stress,
whereas for employees these include diminished
trust in the supervisory process. According to our
results, managers’ justifications for helping subor-
dinates are overwhelmingly instrumental: to facil-
itate sales growth and productivity. Managers ap-
pear to be intuitively aware of results from the
emotion management literature showing that help-
ing employees with their emotional needs tends to
increase employee commitment and performance
(e.g., Armeli, Eisenberger, Fasolo, & Lynch, 1998).
Supportive work behaviors (such as encourage-
ment for individuals who are down) generally en-
hance performance quality, customer satisfaction,
and other measures of organizational effectiveness
(see the review in Bacharach, Bamberger, and
Vashdi [2005]). But if these supportive work behav-
iors themselves generate negative outcomes, then
anticipated organizational benefits may fail to
materialize.
Contribution to Theory and Research
Although leadership theory has long recognized
differences in leadership behaviors (Bedeian &
Hunt, 2006), it has neglected the possibility of in-
congruence between how leaders and followers
view themselves. Thus, one contribution of our
article is to emphasize the possibility of different
attributions concerning the behaviors of those in
command. From a leadership theory perspective,
transformational leadership includes individual-
ized consideration—attention to followers’ feelings
and needs (Avolio & Bass, 1995). Individually con-
siderate leaders help subordinates deal with stress
and other emotional problems in the workplace
(Rafferty & Griffin, 2006). As summarized in Figure
4, employees, in insisting that emotion helping be-
haviors are part of the managerial role, may be
attributing managers with effective leadership
practice, in terms of transformational leadership
behaviors (Ashkanasy & Tse, 2000). The managers
may see themselves as engaging in purely transac-
tional leadership, with their emotion helping be-
havior as something quite different—personal in-
terventions. Ironically, managers may be denied
personal reciprocity from grateful subordinates, be-
cause managers are seen as effective leaders rather
than as colleagues going beyond the bounds
of duty.2013
Toegel, Kilduff, and Anand
To the extent that discrepant expectations lead
employees to see their managers as effective, con-
siderate leaders, the employees are likely to re-
spond with enthusiasm to managerial goal setting,
thus enhancing work performance. According to
one meta-analysis, leaders who provide subordi-
nates with individualized consideration tend to be
seen by subordinates as charismatic (r ⫽ .85; Lowe,
Kroeck, & Sivasubramaniam, 1996). The pro-
nouncements of such leaders are likely to be
viewed as visionary, their encouragement is likely
to incite extra effort, and their teams are likely to
perform well (Bass, Avolio, Jung, & Berson, 2003;
Howell & Frost, 1989; Barling, Weber, & Kelloway,
1996). Our research helps to redress the “dearth of
conceptual and empirical research on explaining
the relationships between these new [charismatic
and transformational] leadership theories and
followers’ affective states” (Avolio, Walumbwa, &
Weber, 2009: 430).
Discrepancies in role definitions are linked to
individual and organizational outcomes. Incongru-
ence in expectations can have pervasive negative
effects on work behavior and on employees’ exit
and loyalty behavior (Rousseau, 1995). Discrepant
role expectations can also lead to supervisor-
subordinate rating disagreements, with potential
consequences for organizational effectiveness (At-
water, Ostroff, Yammarino, & Fleenor, 1998). In-
congruent role descriptions and the resulting dis-
crepant expectations can also influence the quality
of leader-member exchange relationships as a re-
sult of perceived dissimilarity (cf. Gerstner &
Day, 1997).
Our article contributes to critical theory concern-
ing supervisory control over professionals’ emo-
tions and behaviors. Prior work has emphasized
that in professional firms, mentors and mentees
control each other’s behaviors and emotions. Resis-
tance to controlling behavior surfaces in antago-
nism to headquarters rather than to immediate su-
pervisors (Covaleski, Dirsmith, Heian, & Samuel,
1998). Managers, in carrying out their work roles,
confront an inherent and perhaps inescapable am-
bivalence, given the expectation that they will both
monitor employee behavior and foster a supportive
and developmental work atmosphere (Mintzberg,
1973). The dual expectation—to control work ac-
tivity even to the extent of crushing troublemakers,
and to manage negative emotions so that employees
work together and like each other— has both bene-
fits and drawbacks for managers and for employees
that we explored in this research. Future research
351
can investigate whether, in circumstances where
emotional labor is part of work performance, there
is likely to be a managerial emphasis on tight con-
trol over behavior and emotions as well as an em-
phasis on happy, cohesive, family-like together-
ness. Given a disciplinary organizational culture,
employees are likely to resist seeing managerial
control efforts as simply collegial helpfulness.
Our paper also contributes to the field of emotion
management in organizations (see Bolton [2005] for
a review). The emergent models in Figures 3 and 4
represent a new understanding of the process of
managerial intervention including likely positive
and negative outcomes of discrepant role expecta-
tions. Like many other work organizations, the one
we investigated featured a culture of relatively in-
tense control over workplace practices. Managers
tended to be on the lookout for signs of emotional
distress and were prepared to intervene, as neces-
sary, in cases where upset individuals did not
themselves request help.
Our data revealed two main “signatures” of emo-
tion help provision: (a) a short-cut (listening and
giving advice), and (b) an elaborated process that
involved not just listening but also validating, re-
framing, or transforming. The short-cut was more
likely to lead to discrepant expectations, in that
employees were in no doubt that such listening and
advising formed an integral aspect of managerial
work, whereas in the mental accounting of manag-
ers (cf. Thaler, 1999), even listening to and advising
concerning emotional problems were labeled extra-
role behaviors.
There is a similarity between how managers
acted in this organization and how peer counselors
interact with coworkers in unionized organiza-
tions, where assistance is provided out of the sight
of supervisors even to those troubled colleagues
who have not asked for it (Bacharach et al., 2001:
114). The extension of managerial intervention to
the personal aspects of people’s lives in the absence
of any union-based resistance raises questions con-
cerning the vulnerability of employees to manage-
ment pressure. In situations where there are power
differences between those helping and those being
helped, patterns of reciprocity are likely to be dis-
torted (Gouldner, 1960).
Future Research
Bureaucracy has developed to the point where
human resource managers in large organizations try
to anticipate and deal with many issues previously352
Academy of Management Journal
regarded as private matters, such as improving em-
ployee morale (Roethlisberger & Dickson, 1939),
providing Christmas gifts for employees’ children
(Baron, Dobbin, & Jennings, 1986), and eliminating
employees’ offensive body odor (De Botton, 2009).
Future research can investigate what kinds of emo-
tion helping on the part of the managers do, in fact,
restore employees as productive organizational cit-
izens and prevent emotional contamination of oth-
ers in the organization, and whether there are un-
anticipated consequences of such interventions.
Our research surfaced five different types of emo-
tion helping on offer to employees, and the typol-
ogy matches some of the needs that prior research
has identified as resulting from negative emotional
experiences (Rimé, 2007: 474). A major exception
is listening, which in itself does not turn out to be
useful in helping people recover from negative
emotions (Rimé, 2007: 471). Also missing from Ta-
ble 2 is any sense that managers provide the kind of
concrete help and assistance that prior research
(summarized in Rimé, 2007) suggests can facilitate
people moving beyond difficult personal situa-
tions. What is striking in Table 2 is the prevalence
of behaviors that are relatively superficial: listening
and giving advice. The behaviors that really make a
difference in helping people recover their emo-
tional balance—social validation, social support,
reframing, recreation of meaning, and concrete
help and assistance (Rimé, 2007)—are much less in
evidence on the part of managers. Future research
can investigate whether the provision of profes-
sional assistance programs to employees results in
better outcomes for both employees and the com-
pany than the relatively amateurish help provided
by intervening managers.
Even if minimal emotion helping does little to
improve emotional well-being, this helping may
bind employees to the organization by creating a
culture in which emotion problems can be dis-
cussed (Martin et al., 1998), or by fostering em-
ployee indebtedness for favors received (cf. Gould-
ner, 1960). Future research could investigate
whether, as prior work has suggested, “the compas-
sionate workplace may be a factor in both attracting
and retaining staff” (Frost, Dutton, Worline, & Wil-
son, 2000: 38). Particularly in the case of manage-
rial help with negative emotions deriving from
nonwork situations, employees may feel personally
indebted and be less able to rationalize such help as
an expected part of the managerial role.
The employees we investigated worked in open-
plan spaces, in which asking for help constituted a
April
relatively difficult act, given that it was exposed to
public view (cf. Bamberger, 2009: 67). Even people
who work in private offices, such as professors,
find that processing negative emotions at work ex-
poses them to potentially negative repercussions.
But privacy may enable private-office workers to
seek assistance from colleagues and be less subject
to potentially intrusive questioning from supervi-
sors (Frost et al., 2000). We do know that people
who work in open-plan (relative to private) offices
tend to suffer from decreased satisfaction and mo-
tivation (Oldham & Brass, 1979) as well as in-
creased emotional strain (see the review in Sutton
and Rafaeli [1987]). Future research can explore
whether the absence of walls and barriers enables
social relations among employees (cf. Oldham &
Brass, 1979: 267–268), thereby facilitating shared
norms of resistance to expectations by managers
concerning reciprocation for help provided.
To the extent that activist managers generally
listen and empathize, but neither reciprocate self-
disclosure nor actively intervene to solve emo-
tional problems, they may seem to play the role of
classical therapists (Goldstein & Goldberg, 2004),
offering little about themselves but listening care-
fully to the concerns of their “patients.” Managers,
according to our data, seem to be viewed akin to
parental figures whose duties include taking care of
the emotional needs of their dependents. Future
research can investigate whether the discrepancy
between the expectations of managers and subordi-
nates concerning emotion help may be related to
what in the psychotherapy literature is known as
“transference”—the process by which one person
displaces onto an authority figure thoughts, feel-
ings, or expectations that were originally directed
toward important people of early childhood (Gold-
stein & Goldberg, 2004). Because of the likelihood
of gross power differences and the potential for
emotional and personal abuse, the maintenance of
careful boundaries between medical practitioners
and patients is a major consideration in emotional
therapy (Williams & Swartz, 1998). To the extent
that managers act as freelance therapists, this
boundary takes on multiple dimensions, as it in-
volves not only a therapist-patient relationship but
also a manager-subordinate one. Employees with
emotional problems are vulnerable to loss of self-
esteem, especially to the extent that problems are
deemed to be embarrassing or stigmatizing (Bam-
berger, 2009: 65). The potential for managers to
exploit the vulnerability of emotionally distressed
employees is always present, given the power dif-2013
Toegel, Kilduff, and Anand
ference, and given the dual nature of the managerial
role as simultaneously supervisor and therapist.
Future research can also explore whether the per-
vasive differences between men and women with
respect to emotional experiences (Simon & Nath,
2004) and emotional expressiveness (Thoits, 1989)
affect emotion helping in organizations. Are
women managers more likely to offer help, and are
managers (of both sexes) more likely to offer help to
female subordinates? Recent work demonstrates
differences between men and women in how their
emotional expressions are viewed by others, and
suggests that for women, expressing sadness is
more highly approved of than expressing anger
(Brescoll & Uhlmann, 2008). Extending this re-
search, based on our results, one could ask whether
accepting help from managers might result in fe-
male employees (relative to male employees) losing
status.
Organizational Implications
How might employees protect themselves from
the expectations on the part of managers that they
“owe” a personal debt to those who have helped
them with their emotional problems? The opportu-
nity to help managers with their emotional prob-
lems in return is likely to be unavailable, given
status differences. Providing help, while refraining
from requesting help, contributes to and reinforces
the perception of high status (Flynn, Reagans,
Amanatullah, & Ames, 2006). A positive psychol-
ogy emphasis on the importance of emotion man-
agement and the altruism of caring managers must
be balanced by recognition of the dangers inherent
in employees relying on managers for emotion help
(Fineman, 2006). Following the logic of Figure 3,
employees could define emotion helping as part
and parcel of managers’ jobs— defined in such a
way, emotion help would require no extra discre-
tionary response by employees. To the extent that
employees interact with managers only in the con-
text of the workplace, and to the extent that poten-
tial power and discretion is vested in the manage-
rial role, employees can justify attributing
managerial caring surveillance to the demands of
the role rather than to the idiosyncrasies of the
person (Turner, 1978), and thereby overcome the
general tendency to attribute such distinctive be-
havior to individual dispositions (cf. Ross, 1977).
By refusing to acknowledge a reciprocal obligation
beyond the normal work contract, employees can
interpret the ambiguous emotion helping script to
353
their own advantage and refuse to let the manager
step beyond the professional boundaries of the
workplace.
Given the potential problems resulting from dis-
crepant role expectations, what should organiza-
tions do? Managers can be educated concerning the
wide-ranging aspects of the managerial role (cf.
Mintzberg, 1973), and made aware that helping oth-
ers with emotional problems is likely to be seen by
subordinates as part and parcel of managerial work
within the context of the organization’s overall sup-
portive climate (cf. Eisenberger et al., 2010). The
good news for managers should also be communi-
cated: employees are likely to ascribe helping be-
haviors on the part of managers to the quality of
these managers’ leadership skills. At the same time,
managers can be educated in the limits of their
expertise when it comes to dealing with seriously
upset subordinates.
It is important to note limitations to our approach
that can be addressed in future research endeavors.
Recent research has indicated that handling the
difficult emotions of others can have negative indi-
vidual outcomes such as frustration, burnout, ill-
ness, and failed personal and professional relation-
ships (Frost, 2003; Kahn, 1993; Meyerson, 2000).
As one of our informants noted, one consequence
of processing the negative emotions of others is that
“You do get stressed out and take it home with you.
One is definitely suffering as a result of this.”
Clearly, we need more research on how some of the
downsides for managers of “toxin handling” (Frost
& Robinson, 1999; Frost, 2003) can be mitigated.
Further, we are not able in this research to trace
either the positive or the negative outcomes of emo-
tion helping interventions with respect to such as-
pects as customer satisfaction, on the one hand, or
employee productivity, on the other. Thus, future
research can investigate whether the claims made
on behalf of emotion helping are validated by re-
sults in organization and in the marketplace.
Conclusion
Managers of organizations are empowered to
control work processes in pursuit of productivity.
Control involves monitoring, assessing, and disci-
plining (rewarding and punishing) employees (Ed-
wards, 1979). Thus, managers have discretion to
intervene in many aspects of employees’ work. But
work in modern organizations encompasses not
just physical labor but also (in the case of service
organizations) emotional labor (Hochschild,354
Academy of Management Journal
1983)—labor that involves the employment of emo-
tions in the service of the organization. The control
of emotional labor places managers in the position
of having to monitor employees’ appropriate emo-
tions and possibly intervene when emotions seem
inappropriate. In this article, we focused on mana-
gerial interventions to ameliorate employees’ neg-
ative emotions. To the extent that these interven-
tions represent efforts to control as well as to help,
such interventions are likely to perpetuate incon-
gruent perceptions and mixed outcomes.
April
ents, consequences and new insights for future re-
search. Research in Personnel and Human Re-
sources Management, 28: 49 –98.
Barling, J., Weber, T., & Kelloway, E. K. 1996. Effects of
transformational leadership training on attitudinal
and financial outcomes: A field experiment. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 81: 827– 832.
Baron, J., Dobbin, F., & Jennings, P. D. 1986. War and
peace: The evolution of modern personnel adminis-
tration in U.S. industry. American Journal of Soci-
ology, 92: 350 –383.
REFERENCES Barsade, S. 2002. The ripple effect: Emotional contagion
and its influence on group behavior. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 47: 644 – 675.
Armeli, S., Eisenberger, R., Fasolo, P., & Lynch, P. 1998.
Perceived organizational support and police perfor-
mance: The moderating influence of socioemotional
needs. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83: 288 –297. Bass, B. M., Avolio, B. J., Jung, D. I., & Berson, Y. 2003.
Predicting unit performance by assessing transfor-
mational and transactional leadership. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 88: 207–218.
Ashkanasy, N. M., & Daus, C. S. 2002. Emotion in the
workplace: The new challenge for managers. Acad-
emy of Management Executive, 16(1): 76 –86. Bedeian, A., & Hunt, J. 2006. Academic amnesia and
vestigial assumptions of our forefathers. Leadership
Quarterly, 17: 190 –205.
Ashkanasy, N. M., & Tse, B. 2000. Transformational lead-
ership as management of emotion: A conceptual re-
view. In N. Ashkanasy & C. Hartel & W. Zerbe (Eds.),
Emotions in the workplace: Research theory and
practice: 221–235. Westport, CT: Quorum. Bergeron, D. 2007. The paradox of organizational citizen-
ship behavior: Good citizens at what cost? Academy
of Management Review, 32: 1078 –1095.
Atwater, L., Ostroff, C., Yammarino, F., & Fleenor, J.
1998. Self-other agreement: Does it really matter?
Personnel Psychology, 51: 577–598.
Avolio, B. J., & Bass, B. M. 1995. Individual consideration
viewed at multiple levels of analysis: A multi-frame-
work for examining the diffusion of transformational
leadership. Leadership Quarterly, 6: 188 –218.
Avolio, B. J., Walumbwa, F. O., & Weber, T. J. 2009.
Leadership: Current theories, research, and future
directions. In S. T. Fiske, D. L. Schacter, & S. E.
Taylor (Eds.), Annual review of psychology, vol. 60:
421– 449. Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.
Bacharach, S., Bamberger, P., & Sonnenstuhl, W. J. 1996.
The organizational transformation process: The mi-
cropolitics of dissonance reduction and the align-
ment of logics of action. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 41: 477–506.
Bacharach, S., Bamberger, P., & Sonnenstuhl, W. 2001.
Mutual aid and union renewal: Cycles of logics of
action. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Bacharach, S., Bamberger, P., & Vashdi, D. 2005. Diver-
sity and homophily at work: Supportive relations
among white and African-American peers. Academy
of Management Journal, 48: 619 – 644.
Bamberger, P. 2009. Employee help-seeking: Anteced-
Blau, P. 1964. Exchange and power in social life. New
York: Wiley.
Bolino, M. C. 1999. Citizenship and impression manage-
ment: Good soldiers or good actors? Academy of
Management Review, 24: 82–98.
Bolino, M. C., & Turnley, W. H. 2005. The personal costs
of citizenship behavior: The relationship between
employee conscientiousness and role overload, job
stress, and work-family conflict. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 90: 740 –748.
Bolton, S. 2005. Emotion management in the work-
place. London: Palgrave.
Bowler, W. M., & Brass, D. J. 2006. Relational correlates
of interpersonal citizenship behavior: A social net-
work perspective. Journal of Applied Psychology,
91: 70 – 82.
Brescoll, V. L., & Uhlmann, E. L. 2008. Can an angry
woman get ahead? Status conferral, gender, and ex-
pression of emotion in the workplace. Psychological
Science, 19: 268 –275.
Cameron, K., Dutton, J., & Quinn, R. (Eds.). 2003. Positive
organizational scholarship. San Francisco: Berrett-
Koehler.
Cialdini, R. B., Vincent, J. E., Lewis, S. K., Catalan, J.,
Wheeler, D., & Darby, B. L. 1975. Reciprocal conces-
sions procedure for inducing compliance: The door-2013
Toegel, Kilduff, and Anand
in-the-face technique. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 31: 206 –215.
Cotterell, N., Eisenberger, R., & Speicher, H. 1992. Inhib-
iting effects of reciprocation wariness on interper-
sonal relationships. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology, 62: 658 – 668.
Covaleski, M. A., Dirsmith, M. W., Heian, J. B., & Samuel,
S. 1998. The calculated and the avowed: Techniques
of discipline and struggles over identity in big six
public accounting firms. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 43: 293–327.
De Botton, A. 2009. The pleasures and sorrows of work.
New York: Pantheon.
355
good: A conceptual analysis of the mood at work-or-
ganizational spontaneity relationship. Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, 112: 310 –329.
Gerstner, C., & Day, D. V. 1997. Meta-analytic review of
leader-member exchange theory: Correlates and con-
struct issues. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82:
827– 844.
Gioia, D., & Chittipeddi, K. 1991. Sensemaking and
sensegiving in strategic change initiation. Strategic
Management Journal, 12: 433– 448.
Gioia, D., Thomas, J., Clark, S., & Chittipeddi, K. 1994.
Symbolism and strategic change in academia: The
dynamics of sensemaking and influence. Organiza-
tion Science, 5: 363–383.
Dyne, L. V., & LePine, J. A. 1998. Helping and voice
extra-role behaviors: Evidence of construct and pre-
dictive validity. Academy of Management Journal,
41: 108 –119. Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. 1967. The discovery of
grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative re-
search. Chicago: Aldine.
Edwards, R. 1979. Contested terrain: The transforma-
tion of the workplace in the twentieth century.
New York: Basic. Goldstein, W. N., & Goldberg, S. T. 2004. Using the
transference in psychotherapy. Lanham, MD: Row-
man & Littlefield.
Eisenberger, R., Karagonlar, G., Stinglhamber, F., Neves,
P., Becker, T., Gonzalez-Morales, M., & Steiger-
Mueller, M. 2010. Leader-member exchange and af-
fective organizational commitment: The contribu-
tion of supervisor’s organizational embodiment.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 95: 1085–1103. Gouldner, A. 1960. The norm of reciprocity: A prelimi-
nary statement. American Sociological Review, 25:
161–179.
Eisenhardt, K., & Graebner, M. 2007. Theory building
from cases: Opportunities and challenges. Academy
of Management Journal, 50: 25–32.
Elfenbein, H. A. 2007. Emotion in organizations. In J. P.
Walsh & A. P. Brief (Eds.), Academy of Manage-
ment annals, vol. 1: 315–386. New York: Erlbaum.
Fineman, S. 2006. Accentuating the positive? Academy
of Management Review, 31: 306 –308.
Flynn, F. J., Reagans, R. E., Amanatullah, E. T., & Ames,
D. R. 2006. Helping one’s way to the top: Self-mon-
itors achieve status by helping others and knowing
who helps whom. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 91: 1123–1137.
Frost, P. 2003. Toxic emotions at work: How compas-
sionate managers handle pain and conflict. Bos-
ton: Harvard Business School Press.
Frost, P., Dutton, J., Worline, M., & Wilson, A. 2000.
Narratives of compassion in organizations. In S.
Fineman (Ed.), Emotions in organizations: 25– 45.
London: Sage.
Frost, P., & Robinson, S. 1999. The toxic handler: Orga-
nizational hero and casualty. Harvard Business Re-
view, 77(4): 96 –106.
George, J. M., & Brief, A. P. 1992. Feeling good—Doing
Gower, J. C., & Legendre, P. 1986. Metric and euclidean
properties of dissimilarity coefficients. Journal of
Classification, 3: 5– 48.
Grandey, A. A. 2000. Emotion regulation in the work-
place: A new way to conceptualize emotional labor.
Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 5: 59 –
100.
Grandey, A. 2003. When “the show must go on”: Surface
acting and deep acting as determinants of emotional
exhaustion and peer-rated service delivery. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 46: 86 –96.
Grandey, A. 2008. Emotions at work: A review and re-
search agenda. In C. Cooper & J. Barling (Eds.), The
SAGE handbook of organizational behavior: 234 –
261. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hareli, S., & Rafaeli, A. 2008. Emotion cycles: On the
social influence of emotion in organizations. In A. P.
Brief & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in organiza-
tional behavior, vol. 28: 35–59. Greenwich, CT: JAI.
Hochschild, A. R. 1983. The managed heart: Commer-
cialization of human feeling. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Howell, J. M., & Frost, P. J. 1989. A laboratory study of
charismatic leadership. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 43: 243–269.
Humphrey, R. 2002. The many faces of emotional lead-
ership. Leadership Quarterly, 13: 493–504.356
Academy of Management Journal
Huy, Q. N. 2005. Emotion management to facilitate stra-
tegic change and innovation: How emotional balanc-
ing and emotional capability work together. In
C. E. J. Hartel, W. J. Zerbe, & N. M. Ashkanasy (Eds.),
Emotions in organizational behavior: 295–316.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kahn, W. A. 1993. Caring for the caregivers: Patterns of
organizational caregiving. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 38: 539 –563.
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. L. 1966. The social psychology of
organizations. New York: Wiley.
Krackhardt, D. 1990. Assessing the political landscape:
Structure, cognition, and power in organizations.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 35: 342–369.
Krone, K. J., & Morgan, J. M. 2000. Emotion metaphors in
management: The Chinese experience. In S. Fine-
man (Ed.), Emotion in organizations: 83–100. Lon-
don: Sage.
Latané, B., & Arrowood, A. 1963. Emotional arousal and
task performance. Journal of Applied Psychology,
47: 324 –327.
Lawler, E., & Thye, S. 1999. Bringing emotion into social
exchange theory. In K. S. Cook & J. Hagan (Eds.),
Annual review of sociology, vol. 25: 217–244. Palo
Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.
April
Organ, D. W. 1988. Organizational citizenship behav-
ior: The good soldier syndrome. Lexington, MA:
Lexington Books.
Organ, D. W. 1997. Organizational citizenship behavior:
It’s construct clean-up time. Human Performance,
10: 85–97.
Peltier, B. 2010. The psychology of executive coaching:
Theory and application. New York: Routledge.
Podsakoff, N. P., Whiting, S. W., Podsakoff, P. M., &
Blume, B. D. 2009. Individual- and organizational-
level consequences of organizational citizenship be-
haviors: A meta analysis. Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, 94: 122–141.
Rafferty, A. E., & Griffin, M. A. 2006. Refining definitions
of individualized consideration: Distinguishing de-
velopmental leadership and supportive leadership.
Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psy-
chology, 79: 37– 61.
Richards, L. 1999. Using NVivo in qualitative research.
London: Sage.
Rimé, B. 2007. Interpersonal emotion regulation. In J. J.
Gross (Ed.), Handbook of emotion regulation: 466 –
485. New York: Guilford.
Lawler, E., Thye, S., & Yoon, J. 2009. Social commit-
ments in a depersonalized world. New York: Sage. Roethlisberger, F., & Dickson, W. 1939. Management
and the worker: An account of a research program
conducted by the western electric company, Chi-
cago. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lowe, K. B., Kroeck, G. K., & Sivasubramaniam, N. 1996.
Effectiveness correlates of transformational and
transactional leadership: A meta-analytic review of the
MLQ literature. Leadership Quarterly, 7: 385– 425. Ross, L. 1977. The intuitive psychologist and his short-
comings: Distortions in the attribution process. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology: 173–220. New York: Academic.
Martin, J., Knopoff, K., & Beckman, C. 1998. An alterna-
tive to bureaucratic impersonality and emotional la-
bor: Bounded emotionality at the body shop. Admin-
istrative Science Quarterly, 43: 429 – 469.
Meyerson, D. 2000. If emotions were honored: A cultural
analysis. In S. Fineman (Ed.), Emotion in organiza-
tions: 167–183. London: Sage.
Miles, M., & Huberman, A. 1994. Qualitative data anal-
ysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mintzberg, H. 1973. The nature of managerial work.
New York: HarperCollins.
Morrison, E. 1994. Role definitions and organizational
citizenship behaviors: The importance of the em-
ployees’ perspective. Academy of Management
Journal, 37: 1543–1567.
Oldham, G. R., & Brass, D. J. 1979. Employee reactions to
an open-plan office: A naturally occurring quasi-
experiment. Administrative Science Quarterly, 24:
267–284.
Rousseau, D. 1989. Psychological and implied contracts
in organizations. Employee Rights and Responsibil-
ities Journal, 2: 121–139.
Rousseau, D. 1995. Psychological contracts in organiza-
tions: Understanding written and unwritten agree-
ments. London & New York: Sage.
Settoon, R. P., & Mossholder, K. W. 2002. Relationship
quality and relationship context as antecedents of
person- and task-focused interpersonal citizenship
behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87: 255–
267.
Simon, R., & Nath, L. 2004. Gender and emotion in the
U.S.: Do men and women differ in self-reports of
feelings and expressive behavior? American Journal
of Sociology, 109: 1137–1176.
Spector, P. E., & Fox, S. 2010. Theorizing about the de-
viant citizen: An attributional explanation of the
interplay of organizational citizenship and counter-
productive work behavior. Human Resource Man-
agement Review, 20: 132–143.2013
Toegel, Kilduff, and Anand
Spitzmuller, M., Van Dyne, L., & Ilies, R. 2008. Organi-
zational citizenship behavior: A critical review and
extension of its nomological network. In C. Cooper &
J. Barling (Eds.), Handbook of organizational be-
havior: 106 –123. London: Sage.
Spradley, J. 1979. The ethnographic interview. New
York: Holt Rinehart & Winston.
Sutton, R. I., & Rafaeli, A. 1987. Characteristics of work
stations as potential occupational stressors. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 30: 260 –276.
Thaler, R. 1999. Mental accounting matters. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 12: 183–206.
Thoits, P. A. 1989. The sociology of emotions. In W. R.
Scott & J. Blake (Eds.), Annual review of sociology,
vol. 15: 317–342. Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.
Toegel, G., Anand, N., & Kilduff, M. 2007. Emotion help-
ers: The role of high positive affectivity and high
self-monitoring managers. Personnel Psychology,
60: 337–365.
Tsui, A. S., Pearce, J. L., Porter, L. W., & Tripoli, A. M.
1997. Alternative approaches to the employee-organ-
ization relationship: Does investment in employees
pay off? Academy of Management Journal, 40:
1089 –1121.
Turner, R. H. 1978. The role and the person. American
Journal of Sociology, 84: 1–23.
Van Dyne, L., Cummings, L. L., & McLean Parks, J. 1995.
Extra-role behaviors: In pursuit of construct and def-
initional clarity. In L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw
(Eds.), Research in organizational behavior: 215–
285. Stamford, CT: JAI.
Van Dyne, L., & Ellis, J. B. 2004. Job creep: A reactance
theory perspective on organizational citizenship be-
havior as over-fulfillment of obligations. In J. A. M.
Coyle-Shapiro, L. M. Shore, M. S. Taylor, & L. E.
Tetrick (Eds.), The employment relationship: Ex-
amining psychological and contextual perspec-
tives: 182–205. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Van Maanen, J. 1988. Tales of the field: On writing
ethnography. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wayne, S., Shore, L., & Liden, R. 1997. Perceived organ-
izational support and leader-member exchange: A
social exchange perspective. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 40: 82–111.
Williams, J., & Swartz, M. 1998. Treatment boundaries in
the case management relationship: A clinical case
357
and discussion. Community Mental Health Journal,
34: 299 –311.
Zellars, K. L., & Perrewé, P. L. 2001. Affective personality
and the content of emotional social support: Coping
in organizations. Journal of Applied Psychology,
86: 459 – 467.
APPENDIX
Interview Protocol
We try to understand how people use the support of
others to cope with difficult emotions. I would ask you to
think of a situation when you experienced stress, anxi-
ety, tension or emotional pain and a colleague of yours
helped you to cope with it.
• Could you please describe this situation?
• What kind of person was the emotion helper? Does
everybody in the firm provide this kind of help or only
some people?
• How did X provide the emotion help you needed?
What made you feel better?
• Why do you think X provided the emotion help you
needed?
• What were the personal benefits/costs involved for X?
• [If a manager is mentioned] Are managers expected to
provide emotion help? Is emotion help part of their
job? Do people “pay back” this help? In what form?
• Do you think of yourself as an emotion helper?
Ginka Toegel (Ginka.Toegel@imd.ch) is a professor of
leadership at IMD, Lausanne. She received her Ph.D. in
Psychology from Leipzig University and her Ph.D. in
Management from London Business School. Her current
research interests focus on emotion in organizations,
control-related beliefs, and leadership effectiveness.
Martin Kilduff (m.kilduff@ucl.ac.uk) is professor of or-
ganizational behavior at University College London. He
received his Ph.D. from Cornell University. His research
interests include interpersonal networks, emotions, per-
sonality, and philosophy of science.
N. Anand (anand@imd.ch) is the Shell Professor of
Global Leadership at IMD, Lausanne. He received his
Ph.D. from Vanderbilt University. His research focuses
on innovative organizational structures in professional
firms, organizational field formation, and the use of so-
cial networks in managing emotions.