Received: 27 September 2015
Revised: 6 October 2017
Accepted: 23 October 2017
DOI: 10.1002/smj.2763
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Big splash, no waves? Cognitive mechanisms
driving incumbent firms’ responses to low-price
market entry strategies
Jukka Luoma 1 | Tomas Falk 1 | Dirk Totzek 2 | Henrikki Tikkanen 1 |
Alexander Mrozek 3
1
Department of Marketing, Aalto University
School of Business, Aalto, Finland
2
School of Business, Economics and Information
Systems, University of Passau, Passau, Germany
3
Google Germany, Berlin, Germany
Correspondence
Jukka Luoma, Department of Marketing, Aalto
University School of Business, P.O. Box 21230,
FI-00076 Aalto, Finland.
Email: jukka.luoma@aalto.fi
Strat Mgmt J. 2018;1–23.
Research Summary: Low-price market entries, aiming for
rapid sales growth, tend to prompt strong competitive
reactions. This research explores whether and how firms
using low-price entry strategies can mitigate retaliatory
incumbent reactions. An experiment with 656 managers
shows that entrants can attenuate the strength of incum-
bents’ responses by fostering perceptions of high aggres-
siveness or low commitment. Entrants may be able to
accomplish this by adjusting their entry strategy to embed
(subtle) cues of aggressiveness and (lack of) commitment.
A replication experiment with university students rein-
forces our overall theoretical argument. However, the
results also indicate that the interpretation of cues embed-
ded in the entry strategy may be affected by the experience
of incumbent firm managers. Overall, these results clarify
the cognitive foundations of competitive responses to mar-
ket entry.
Managerial Summary: What drives incumbents to
respond strongly to market entries, and what can the
entrant, if anything, do to mitigate those responses? This
research offers empirical evidence and theoretical insights
for managers faced with these questions by shedding light
on the thinking processes preceding competitive
responses. The study shows that while managers are moti-
vated to respond strongly to market entries that appear to
be highly consequential to their business, these responses
may be mitigated if the entrant manages to foster percep-
tions of high aggressiveness or low commitment to the
market. Managers form these perceptions in part on the
basis of the entrant’s behavior, creating an opportunity for
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/smj
Copyright © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
1LUOMA
2
ET AL .
entrants to adjust their entry strategies in a manner that
demotivates strong competitive responses.
KEYWORDS
behavioral strategy, competitive dynamics, experimental
study, market entry, pricing
1 | I N T R O D U C T I ON
Entering an existing market involves balancing two goals. On the one hand, it is desirable to enter a
market with a “big splash,” that is, to grow market share quickly and enjoy the associated positive
feedback effects, such as “learning by doing, scale economies, network effects, information conta-
gion, and the accumulation of complementary assets” (Sterman et al., 2007, p. 684). On the other
hand, entrants would like to avoid the “waves” associated with a big splash, that is, the strong, pos-
sibly devastating competitive reactions by incumbents. These goals are often seen as contradictory;
entrants must choose between making a high-impact entry and minimizing the likelihood of a coun-
terattack (Chen & Hambrick, 1995; Chen, Smith, & Grimm, 1992; Chen, Su, & Tsai, 2007).
This study explores the possibility that this trade-off may not be that clear-cut. Indeed, prior the-
oretical arguments suggest that highly impactful market entry strategies may sometimes deter
incumbent firm counterattacks (e.g., Fan, 2010; McGrath, Chen, & MacMillan, 1998; Wang &
Shaver, 2014). Consequently, we ask if and how a firm might be able to dampen the waves associ-
ated with a big splash market entry. And, if they can, what are the cognitive mechanisms underlying
a weakened competitive response of the incumbent?
We explore these issues in the context of entry pricing, focusing on what determines incumbent
responses to a new competitor’s low-price market entry strategy (LPMES). Entering a market with a
below-market price is appealing, as a low price offers a clear signal of economic advantage over the
incumbents’ offerings, thus inducing customer switching and fueling rapid sales and market share
growth (e.g., Spann, Fischer, & Tellis, 2015). However, incumbents can easily spot the low price
and are likely to perceive it as threatening. As retaliatory price cuts are easy to implement, incum-
bents tend to rapidly cut prices in response to low-price market entries (Debruyne, Moenaertb, &
Griffinc, 2002; Kuester, Homburg, & Robertson, 1999), thus countering the intended positive effects
of an LPMES (McCann & Vroom, 2010; Simon, 2005).
Apart from that, managers’ assessments of the entrant’s longer-term behavioral intentions might
also affect the incumbent’s competitive responses. In particular, we predict that managers are likely
to be less motivated to attack entrants who are expected to act aggressively in the market (e.g., Fan,
2010), due to a fear of triggering a destructive “race to the bottom.” Conversely, managers are more
prone to attack entrants perceived as committed to the market (e.g., Heil & Walters, 1993), due to
the belief that such entrants present a long-term competitive threat unless dealt with immediately.
Thus, the incumbent’s response may be mitigated if the entrant succeeds to foster perceptions high
aggressiveness or low commitment. An experiment with 656 managers supports these predictions. A
replication study with 1,070 university students reveals a qualitatively similar pattern of results.
Our study also illuminates how the entrant might be able to influence the incumbent’s percep-
tions of aggressiveness and commitment. Building on the cue approach (e.g., Chen & MacMillan,LUOMA ET AL .
3
1992; Marcel, Barr, & Duhaime, 2011), we assume that cues embedded in the actions of the entrant
may shape incumbent firm managers’ information processing, and hence, their perceptions concern-
ing the entrant. In particular, our experiments test how four alternative LPMESs (i.e., penetration
pricing, introductory pricing, price-matching guarantees [PMG], and bonus pricing) affect man-
agers’ perceptions of entrant aggressiveness and commitment. In the manager sample, participants
perceive entrants using introductory pricing and PMGs as more aggressive than entrants using pene-
tration pricing. In turn, managers tend to interpret bonus pricing as a signal of low commitment to
the market. These signaling effects help introductory pricing, PMGs and bonus pricing to call forth
milder competitive responses than penetration pricing. However, these effects disappear in the stu-
dent sample. Managers’ interpretive frameworks—that determine their “reading” of the embedded
cues—thus appear to develop through experience (e.g., Heil & Robertson, 1991).
Our study makes three contributions to strategic management research and practice. First, the
results show how an entrant might mitigate the strength of the incumbent firm’s response, without
necessarily reducing the degree of market penetration. A “big splash, no waves” strategy discour-
ages hostile incumbent reactions by signaling high aggressiveness or low commitment. This finding
also adds to an emerging understanding of why firms sometimes decide against (strong)
counterattack-type responses to significant competitive threats (e.g., Wang & Shaver, 2014). Second,
our results clarify the cognitive mechanisms underlying incumbents’ competitive reactions to market
entry. Our empirical findings indicate that incumbents respond not only to (perceived) marketplace
consequences of the entry (e.g., Chen & Miller, 1994; McCann & Vroom, 2010; Simon, 2005), but
simultaneously consider longer-term behavioral intentions of the entrant (i.e., aggressiveness and
commitment). We extend previous literature by elaborating on how these considerations differ theo-
retically as well as by showing how they can be disentangled empirically (e.g., Chen et al., 2007;
Fan, 2010). Finally, we show how seemingly minor changes in the entry strategy (e.g., coupling a
low entry price with a PMG) can serve the function of cuing the incumbent about the entrant’s
behavioral intentions. We complement prior research on competitive cueing (see, e.g., Marcel et al.,
2011), by offering a more direct empirical testing of the cueing effects, but also by showing that the
effectiveness of cues-embedded-in-actions may depend on the prior experiences of the responding
firm’s managers, giving rise to the possibility of cue misinterpretation (Zajac & Bazerman, 1991).
2 | R ESE AR CH FR AM EWORK
2.1 | A behavioral view of competitive reasoning
Our research takes a behavioral view (see, e.g., Powell, Lovallo, & Fox, 2011) on competition.
Behavioral studies of competition examine how managers’ cognitive processes are impacted by
competitive dynamics in the market, and how the outcomes of these cognitive processes, in turn,
shape managers’ decisions about competitive actions (see, e.g., Kilduff, Elfenbein, & Staw, 2010;
Luoma et al., 2017). We focus on how managers form beliefs about the likely behaviors of their
competitors—a process sometimes called competitive reasoning (e.g., Montgomery, Moore, &
Urbany, 2005)—and how those beliefs influence subsequent competitive actions.
Traditional game theoretical models of competition implicitly assume that competitive reasoning
is a relatively unproblematic process as long as the managers have access to information about the
payoffs of different action options available to the competitor (Chen & MacMillan, 1992). However,
behaviorally oriented research shows a more nuanced story. For instance, the ability to foresee com-
petitive (inter-) actions is not a given, but an ability that accumulates over time as competitors comeLUOMA
4
ET AL .
to know each other through repeated encounters in shared product markets (Tsai, Su, & Chen,
2011). A signaling perspective to competition also argues against managers as purely rational
decision-makers. For instance, bluffs such as announced but non-materialized new product launches
may successfully confuse competitors (Prabhu & Stewart, 2001). Accordingly, a focal firm may be
able to exploit the cognitive vulnerabilities associated with bounded rationality and discourage a
rival firm actions by influencing the rival’s assessment of the focal firm’s behavioral intentions.
2.2 | Determinants of incumbent firm reactions
We assume incumbent firm’s managers incorporate two considerations into their decisions concern-
ing competitive response to market entry (see Figure 1). First, managers consider the likely short-
term consequences of the entry. Generally, a competitive response is more likely when the expected
negative impact of a rival’s action is large (e.g., Chen et al., 2007; McCann & Vroom, 2010; Simon,
2005). The purpose of the competitive response is to nullify or mitigate that negative impact. In the
market entry context, incumbents try to forecast the extent to which the market entry affects their
business. These inferred, but not realized, consequences of the entry capture managers’ beliefs about
the potential loss in sales and market share due to the new market entry—if the incumbent does not
respond (e.g., Chen & Miller, 1994).
Second, managers’ decisions regarding competitive reactions to market entry are based on rea-
soning about the entrant’s longer-term behavioral intentions (including potential counter-reactions).
As indicated above, this process probably lacks the sophistication of game-theoretical models, and
in all likelihood, managers tend not to incorporate recent insights from competitive dynamics
research in their competitive reasoning (e.g., Coyne & Horn, 2009). Yet, we assume, managers are
not entirely blind to their competitors’ intentions and actions either.
More specifically, managers’ competitive reasoning likely focuses on two behavioral traits that
capture important expectations concerning the entrant’s future behavior in the market: aggressive-
ness and commitment. These general behavioral tendencies of the entrant provide heuristic guidance
for the incumbent’s response decision-making (cf. Duarte, Siegel, & Young, 2012). In general, man-
agers tend to view competitive actions in which the ratio of incumbent cost to entrant benefit is
high, or when the entrant shows willingness to sacrifice profits to beat competitors, as signals of
competitive aggressiveness (Fan, 2010; Heil & Robertson, 1991; Hultink & Langerak, 2002; Lump-
kin & Dess, 1996). An action sends a signal of commitment, in turn, when the receiver believes the
Context of entry strategy
Aggressiveness
-
Cues embedded
in the entry
strategy
Entrant-, customer- and incumbent-
related contextual factors
FIGURE 1
Theoretical model
+ Incumbent firm
reaction
+ Price response
Commitment
ConsequenceLUOMA ET AL .
5
sender will “stick to its market action” (Heil & Walters, 1993, p. 56; Hsieh, Tsai, & Chen, 2015)—
in our case, the market entry.
While commitment clearly points to behavioral intentions (Chen, 1996; Chen & MacMillan,
1992; McGrath et al., 1998), literature sometimes understands aggressiveness in behaviorist terms,
for example, as the frequency or speed of competitive actions (e.g., Chen, Lin, & Michel, 2010;
Nadkarni, Chen, & Chen, 2016). However, aggressiveness, like commitment, is not only a charac-
terization of behavior in a certain point in time, but a trait-like concept that captures propensity to
(re-) act in certain ways in the future. This conceptualization of aggressiveness is also in line with
that found in psychology (Carré, McCormick, & Mondloch, 2009). It is precisely this future-
pointing nature of the entrant’s perceived aggressiveness and commitment that renders them effica-
cious in shaping the actions of the incumbent.
A key contribution of our work is to disentangle the three perceptual threat dimensions pertain-
ing to market entry (i.e., perceived aggressiveness and commitment of the entrant, and the perceived
consequence of the entry), and to elaborate on their differential theoretical logic and the effects they
have on the incumbent’s response. Extant literature rarely makes clear distinctions between them.
For example, scholars often use variables such as volume or scale of attack as predictors of competi-
tive responses; such predictors are taken as indicators of aggressiveness (Fan, 2010), commitment
(McGrath et al., 1998), or consequence (Chen et al., 2007), depending on the study. We maintain
that all three perceptual dimensions are impacted by the entry, and all three influence the ensuing
competitive response of the incumbent.
2.3 | Cues embedded in the entry strategy
Our empirical study also explores the antecedents of perceived aggressiveness, commitment, and
consequences. We build on what Marcel et al. (2011, p. 117) call the “cue approach,” that is, the
assumption that the focal firm’s “competitive actions contain embedded signals that other firms must
process and evaluate.” Consequently, we test whether cues embedded in the actions of the entrant
(i.e., characteristics of the selected market entry strategy) have the potential to shape the incumbent
managers’ perceptions concerning the entry and the entrant’s behavioral intentions, and conse-
quently, their competitive response. The plausibility of this general proposition is indicated by prior
empirical work that has associated, for example, different action characteristics with the likelihood
of response (Chen & MacMillan, 1992), and consequent survival likelihood of the initiating firm
(Fan, 2010). The proposition is further reinforced by research showing the ability and tendency of
people to infer each other’s behavioral intentions and traits on the basis of relatively subtle cues
(Carré et al., 2009; Duarte et al., 2012). We also examine entrant-, customer-, and incumbent-related
contextual factors that may influence the incumbent’s response, most important, by affecting the
interpretation of the cues embedded in the entrant’s actions (Kuester et al., 1999).
Cues embedded in the entry strategy can influence both deliberate and intuitive reasoning of
incumbent firm managers concerning the likely consequences of the entry, and the behavioral inten-
tions (i.e., aggressiveness and commitment) of the entrant (e.g., Evans, 2008; Evans & Stanovich,
2013; Kahneman, 2003). Intuitive reasoning encompasses mental processes such as associative pat-
tern matching (Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006), whereby behavioral cues are subconsciously
associated with certain expectations regarding future behavior (e.g., aggressiveness). Such associa-
tions are embedded in semantic networks, which organize knowledge in the long-term memory
(Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968). The basis for such knowledge, in turn, is found in an individuals’ own
direct experiences as well as indirect experiences, stemming from observing or hearing about the
competitive behaviors of other firms and managers. Managers may also use tacit heuristics to inferLUOMA
6
ET AL .
the entrant’s likely intentions on the basis of cues embedded in the entrant’s actions. For example,
using the so-called representativeness heuristic (Kahneman & Tversky, 1972), the manager may
ascribe certain behavioral intentions to the entrant because their manifest behavior “fits” the man-
ager’s mental image of a certain kind of competitor (e.g., a firm committed to the market). Finally,
the incumbent firm manager might try to consciously step “in the shoes” of the entrant (Tsai et al.,
2011, p. 762) in order to understand why the entrant has chosen an entry strategy. This process
hinges on individuals’ ability to “mentalize,” which Gallagher et al. (2002, p. 814) defined as “our
ability to explain and predict the behavior of others by attributing independent mental states, such as
thoughts, beliefs, desires, and intentions, different from our own.” Through such a process, man-
agers reason backward from the actions of the entrant to form an understanding of their (latent)
behavioral intentions (leading to the manifest actions).
3 | HYPOTHESES
The perceived aggressiveness of the entrant is likely to reduce the strength of the incumbent’s
response to a low-price market entry. This should hold, as managers are less motivated to take
action against a rival who is expected to respond aggressively (e.g., Chen & MacMillan, 1992). As
Amit, Domowitz, and Fershtman (1988, pp. 432–433) put it, “if the firm knows that any price
decrease will be matched by the competitor, it has no reason to reduce prices since profits will be
lost.” Similarly, Chen’s (1996) seminal work on competitor analysis proposed that rivals with high
degree of market overlap or similar resource profiles will be unlikely to attack one another because
of a mutual motivation and capability to respond, should one launch an attack against the other. A
reciprocal threat of retaliation is also a central mechanism behind the “mutual forbearance” hypothe-
sis (Heggestad & Rhoades, 1978) in the multimarket competition literature (e.g., Baum & Korn,
1996; Gimeno & Woo, 1996).
Building on this logic, to the extent the managers of the incumbent firm believe the entrant to
behave aggressively, they are likely to predict that the entrant will be responsive to any competitive
moves taken against them (e.g., Fan, 2010, p. 24; Lumpkin & Dess, 2001, p. 431). This implies a
belief that the intended effect of a strong competitive response (e.g., protection of the incumbent’s
market share) will be nullified by the entrant’s subsequent response (e.g., a matching or “see-and-
raise” type counter-reaction). Thus, retaliation is pointless (Wang & Shaver, 2014). Looking further
ahead, the incumbent might decide against such a move out of fear of a “destructive all-out war”
(McGrath et al., 1998, p. 724). Consequently, perceived competitive aggressiveness will reduce the
incumbent’s motivation to slash prices. Thus,
Hypothesis 1 (H1) The greater the perceived aggressiveness of the entrant, the weaker
the incumbent firm manager’s price response.
The likely impact of perceived commitment on the incumbent firm’s price response to entry is
the opposite compared to the effect of perceived aggressiveness. In general, the chance of exit after
an entry is high (e.g., Robinson & Min, 2002). From a profit-seeking standpoint, it is reasonable to
refrain from responding to a new competitor in the hopes that the entrant will exit the market after
disappointing performance feedback, or due to the depletion of resources needed to operate in the
market during the phase when the enterprise is not yet profitable. A strong price reaction to a com-
petitor who is just “passing through” will permanently affect the incumbent’s profitability because a
subsequent price increase may be hard to justify to customers. Thus, if the managers of theLUOMA ET AL .
7
incumbent firm perceive the entrant as not committed, they may expect the competitive threat to be
transient, which motivates them to refrain from cutting prices. On the contrary, a committed entrant
presents a persistent threat that calls for immediate action (Hultink & Langerak, 2002).
Additionally, mimetic isomorphism might lead the incumbent firm managers to reinforce their
own mental commitment to a market upon witnessing other committed firms in the market (Hsieh
et al., 2015). Contagiousness of commitment is supported, for example, by Greve’s (1995) study of
strategy abandonment among U.S. radio stations. Heightened commitment to the market may, in
turn, motivate competitive actions that help the incumbent maintain their hold of the market. This
may further increase the positive association between perceived commitment and the intensity of the
incumbent’s price response. Therefore,
Hypothesis 2 (H2) The greater the perceived commitment of the entrant, the stronger
the incumbent firm manager’s price response.
In addition to the depicted effects of perceived aggressiveness and commitment on incumbent
managers’ price reactions, managers will be more motivated to cut prices if the perceived conse-
quences of the entry are high. A reciprocal price cut that mitigates the incumbent’s loss of sales can
be a rational move for two reasons. One the one hand, a price cut may help preserve the firm’s scale
of operations and its associated efficiency and bargaining advantages, which in turn, translate into
higher contribution margins. On the other hand, a price cut may preserve absolute profits, even if
this comes at the cost of contribution margins. This logic is in line with prior pricing research
emphasizing the rational reasoning behind competitive response decision- making (Simon, 2005).
Besides these rational reasons, managers will be interested in organizational size in its own right,
whether or not this is consistent with the principle of profit maximization (e.g., Greve, 2008).
Finally, highly consequential market entries are likely to reinforce subjective perceptions of rivalry
(Kilduff et al., 2010); in a rivalrous mindset, managers selectively focus on evaluating their perfor-
mance relative to their chief competitors and overemphasize beating them (Kalra & Soberman,
2008). As a result, managers may employ (overly) aggressive pricing actions (Armstrong & Col-
lopy, 1996). Overall, this line of reasoning suggests that
Hypothesis 3 (H3) The greater the perceived consequence of the entry, the stronger
the incumbent firm manager’s price response.
4 | E M P I R I C A L RE S E A R C H
4.1 | Overview of the experimental approach
We tested our hypotheses in an experimental setting with managers as study participants. Our
hypotheses require capturing managers’ perceptions concerning the entry and the entrant as well as
the decisions made on the basis of those perceptions. This is challenging, especially using the domi-
nant methodological approaches in competitive dynamics. Prior research on incumbent response to
entry mostly relies on secondary data (e.g., Simon, 2005), as does competitive dynamics research
more generally. In studies based on observational, secondary data, it is difficult to capture manage-
rial cognitions. They need to be inferred from informational sources such as annual reports or news
items, which contain a lot of noise, and potentially, bias. While a survey study could overcome this
problem (e.g., Kuester et al., 1999)—a retrospective evaluation of specific (past) entries by8
LUOMA
ET AL .
incumbent firm managers might be biased, too (Golden, 1992). However, while an experimental
approach helps address these limitations, this may come at the cost of reduced external validity. To
improve external validity, we decided to recruit experienced managers in the study, most of whom
had been responsible for a recent pricing decision in their firms. This increases the likelihood that
their responses reflect what they would do in an actual business situation (Shah & Swaminathan,
2008: 477).
4.2 | Manipulations
Besides testing our hypotheses, we also use the experiment to examine how cues embedded in the
LPMES of the entrant, or the broader context of the market entry, influence the manager’s beliefs
concerning the future behavioral intentions of the entrant (i.e., aggressiveness and commitment) as
well as the perceived consequence of the entry. In order to enhance the external validity of our find-
ings, we construct the LPMES-related manipulations on the basis of managerial experience, rather
than by designing hypothetical entry strategies with cues embedded to maximize effect sizes. To
achieve this, we conducted a qualitative pre-study encompassing 15 telephone interviews and mail
surveys of 42 seasoned managers. Based on the insights gained from the qualitative pre-study, we
focus on the effects of penetration pricing (i.e., an entry with a price that is lower than the current
market price) (e.g., Spann et al., 2015), and its three major alternatives: introductory pricing, PMGs,
and bonus pricing. Details of the pre-study are available in Appendix S1.
First, introductory pricing sets an exceptionally low promotional price for a limited and prean-
nounced time. When the time period ends, prices increase toward the market-price level. Second,
when issuing a PMG, a firm promises to refund money to customers if they find a cheaper price for
the product elsewhere (Dutta, Biswas, & Grewal, 2011). Finally, bonus pricing is a market entry
strategy in which firms do not lower the absolute price level, but lower the relative price by increas-
ing product value through a “bonus” (e.g., larger package size).
While we do not present formal hypotheses about the effects of alternative LPMESs on the
threat perceptions of the incumbent, it is plausible that the different variants of the LPMES may
embed cues about aggressiveness and commitment of the entrant, or the likely consequences of the
entry, which in turn shape the incumbent’s competitive responses. For example, when compared
with penetration pricing, PMGs provide additional cues that should reinforce the manager’s percep-
tion of aggressiveness. The public announcement to undercut competitors’ price signals to the mar-
ket that the firm wishes to beat competitors whenever a customer is considering a purchase,
regardless of the profit implication. A PMG clearly prioritizes winning the competition over profits,
which is well aligned with the notion of aggressiveness. It is true that the use of PMGs may increase
equilibrium prices (Edlin & Emch, 1999). That is, PMGs promote non-aggressive behaviors ex post.
However, they do this precisely because they signal aggressiveness ex ante (Amit et al., 1988).
Conversely, bonus pricing should mask the aggressiveness of the entrant to a certain extent.
While in terms of unit prices, bonus pricing may be just as aggressive as penetration pricing, man-
agers need to perform conscious mental calculations to reveal that fact. Consequently, the cognitive
accessibility of the aggressiveness trait in the mind of the responding firm’s manager should be
lower if the entrant uses bonus pricing (for a discussion about accessibility, see Kahneman, 2003,
p. 699). As bonus pricing is not automatically associated with aggressiveness, managers are less
likely to judge the entrant as possessing this behavioral trait.
Finally, incumbents might perceive introductory pricing as a sign of commitment. This should
hold as introductory pricing makes explicit references to the longer-term plans of the entrant in theLUOMA ET AL .
9
market (i.e., future price increases). This talk about future actions in the market makes sense only
insofar as the entrant expects to stay committed to the market.
Our manipulations hold unit prices constant across the LPMESs. The exception is introductory
pricing, for which a comparable unit price cannot be determined unambiguously. The time dimen-
sion in introductory pricing makes it impossible to make unit price comparisons because the realized
unit price depends on customers’ timing of purchase. 1 At any rate, even in the cases where unit
prices are equal, the (perceived) consequences of the LPMESs may differ. For example, when cus-
tomers recognize a new supplier offering a PMG, they might expect that this will lead to further
price cuts in the future. Consequently, customers could delay their purchase decisions, causing the
(short-term) consequence of the entry to diminish (Horsky, 1990). However, if customers think more
strategically, as discussed above, and expect a PMG to foster higher equilibrium prices, they will
not delay their purchase decision. Bonus pricing, in turn, might lead to lowered perceived conse-
quence, if the managers believe that customers experience diminishing marginal utility from obtain-
ing a greater quantity of the same product.
Apart from the LPMESs themselves, we also manipulate the context surrounding the entrant’s
entry strategy. From a theoretical standpoint, the goal of these manipulations is to check whether
our results concerning LPMESs are contingent on major determinants of the entrant or incumbent
success in the market (Debruyne et al., 2002). Building on prior research, we manipulate contextual
conditions related to the entering firm (innovativeness), customers (price sensitivity), and the incum-
bent (market share). For example, Kuester et al. (1999) found that the innovativeness of the entrant’s
product was associated with a weakened price response, but a strong reaction in the product dimen-
sion (e.g., product improvements). However, given that our experimental setup considers exclusively
pricing responses, we expect innovativeness to elicit stronger price responses (Robinson, 1988), in
line with the expectancy-valence framework (e.g., Chen & Miller 1994). In a similar vein, we expect
price sensitivity to strengthen the incumbent’s response (Kuester et al., 1999). Price sensitivity
affects competitive interaction because it defines the ease with which they change to a newly intro-
duced and cheaper product. Finally, the incumbent’s market share may reduce the strength of its
price retaliation after the entry of a new competitor (Kuester et al., 1999). It is likely that the relative
size of the incumbent makes profitability goals more salient, in comparison to organizational size
goals, in line with the sequential allocation of attention hypothesis in the behavioral theory of the
firm (Greve, 2008).
4.3 | Experimental design and procedure
We developed a 4 (entrant’s LPMES) × 2 (entrant’s relative product innovativeness) × 2 (incum-
bent’s market share) × 2 (customers’ price sensitivity) full factorial between-subjects experimental
design, leading to 32 (= 4 × 2 × 2 × 2) different scenarios. The design of the experiment was
guided by an experimental pre-study with 248 graduate and MBA students. The pre-study used the
pharmaceutical industry as the context of entry. From preliminary data analyses, external feedback,
and discussions within the research team, we decided to change the industry to reduce the likelihood
that competitive responses would be anchored by the managers’ experience with the industry as
consumers.
We asked the participants to imagine that they were the incumbent firm’s product manager for
Alpha, a fictional brand for specialized screws purchased by both corporate and individual cus-
tomers. We told participants that Alpha was faced with a new competitor Beta that prepared to enter
1
We thank two anonymous reviewers for helping us see this point.10
LUOMA
ET AL .
the market. We also told participants that the incumbent was currently selling one box containing
two screws for €1.99 and that the firm profited considerably from this product. The participants
were told that Alpha would use an LPMES, the specifics of which were varied.
We chose the setting to be a market for specialized screws because it represents a mass-market
product for which scale economies are likely to be important. In this setting, the incumbents are
motivated to protect their sales volumes, even at the cost of profit margins per product sold. For the
same reasons, an LPMES is a realistic option for the entrant (Noble & Gruca, 1999; Tellis, 1986),
enhancing the realism of the experimental setup. Moreover, the chosen industry is intended to repre-
sent a context with a relatively low level of product differentiation (i.e., a mature market with a mar-
ket price). The purpose of this is to provide a cue to the managers that the entrants are head-to-head
competitors of the incumbent firm, in the spirit of prior competitive dynamics literature
(e.g., Ferrier, 2001).
In the penetration pricing condition, the entrant set a price of €1.39 for a box of two screws.
Thus, the penetration pricing scenario promoted a unit price significantly below the unit price of
Alpha (€.69 versus €.99). In the introductory pricing condition, the entrant charged €.99 for a box
of two screws during a promotional period of four weeks before raising prices to €1.79. A simple
average resulted in an average unit price of €.69. In the PMG condition, the entry price was €1.39
for a box of two screws. In addition, we indicated that the entrant guaranteed a refund (i.e., the dif-
ference between the entrant’s and the competitor’s price) in case customers found a similar competi-
tor offering for a lower price. In the bonus pricing condition, the entrant charged €1.99 for a box of
three screws, thus offering one more screw than the incumbent’s offering. In other words, the entrant
increased package size by 50%, thereby setting a unit price of €.66.
With respect to the contextual conditions, we first manipulated the entrant’s relative product
innovativeness as similar or superior. In the similar innovativeness condition, the competitor’s prod-
uct did not offer more benefits than the incumbent’s product. In the superior innovativeness condi-
tion, the entrant’s product offered an improved screwing mechanism and slipping protection as
additional benefits. Second, Alpha’s market share before market entry could be either low or high
(“Your company currently has a small [large] share of the market for specialized screws”). Third,
customers’ price sensitivity could be either low (“Based on prior market research you know that
price is a minor determinant for consumers when buying a specialized screw”) or high (“Based on
prior market research you know that price is a major determinant for consumers when buying a spe-
cialized screw”). Thus, each participant faced an LPMES scenario characterized by a combination
of these contextual conditions (see Appendix S1 for the scenario descriptions).
After presenting the scenario, we asked participants to decide a competitive response along the
price dimension of the competitive repertoire. In addition, we measured the managers’ perceptions
concerning aggressiveness, commitment, and consequence to obtain evidence about the behavioral
mechanisms underlying the incumbent’s competitive response and to test our corresponding hypoth-
eses. Finally, we assessed a set of control variables.
4.4 | Sample
We relied on a commercial data provider to recruit participants currently employed as managers in
marketing and management positions in different industries (Crilly, Ni, & Jiang, 2016). The data
provider invited selected members of its online panel to participate in the study. The data provider
company compensated participants with a standard fee after the completion of the study.
Performance-based pay was not used because it is not possible to determine an objectiveLUOMA ET AL .
11
performance criterion in the situation depicted by the experiment (cf. Artinger & Powell, 2016;
Cain, Moore, & Haran, 2015).
The study was conducted in Germany in 2014. Filter questions ensured that only managers with
work experience of more than one year could participate. Overall, 656 managers participated in our
study (69% male). Participants’ average age was 44.3 years (median: 44 years), and they had on
average 21.5 years of professional experience (median: 20.5 years). Participants had different func-
tional backgrounds; most of them, however, held positions in marketing/sales (26%) and general
(18%) or senior (13%) management, or were owners of the company/self-employed (12%). Finally,
65% of the participants indicated having made pricing decisions at least once in the last year.
Because of the high number of scenarios, each participant could volunteer to evaluate two alter-
native scenarios, which we fully randomized across participants. There were 447 (209) participants
who evaluated one scenario (two scenarios). We found no evidence of order effects in case of the
evaluation of two scenarios. In addition, participants evaluating one or two scenarios did not differ
in their composition with regard to gender (χ 2 (1) = 0.29, p = .59), functional background
(χ 2 (7) = 9.28, p = .23), experience in their current position (χ 2 (4) = 4.87, p = .30), or responsibil-
ity for a pricing decision at least once in the last year (χ 2 (1) = 0.24, p = .63). Thus, we pooled all
evaluations of 865 entry scenarios in total.
4.5 | Measures
We capture the managers’ perceptions of aggressiveness and commitment of the entrant, and the
perceived consequences of the entry using established scales. We assess perceived aggressiveness
with three items adapted from Heil and Walters (1993), Hultink and Langerak (2002), and Robert-
son, Eliashberg, and Rymon (1995). We measure perceived commitment with two items from Hul-
tink and Langerak (2002). We measure the consequence of entry for the incumbent in terms of the
potential loss in market share, revenue, and sales with three items adapted from Heil and Walters
(1993) and Hultink and Langerak (2002). To measure the incumbent’s price response, we asked par-
ticipants to indicate a price response in terms of the new price for a box of two screws (in €) in an
open question (for their brand Alpha). Lower (higher) prices indicate stronger (weaker) incumbent
firm responses.
To test the reliability and validity of our measures, we ran an exploratory factor analysis that
included all indicators. A clear factor pattern emerged. All indicators loaded highly (>0.76) on the
expected factors (Gerbing & Anderson, 1988). Cronbach’s α’s were greater than 0.70 for all con-
structs (Churchill, 1979). We also ran a confirmatory factor analysis for a measurement model that
included perceived aggressiveness, perceived commitment, and perceived consequence. The results
show that the measures exhibit desirable psychometric properties (Bagozzi & Yi, 1988). The overall
model fit is good (CFI = 0.99, Tucker–Lewis index = 0.99, standardized root mean square residual
= 0.02, RMSEA = 0.04). The average variance extracted is above 0.50 for all constructs (conver-
gent validity), and above the relevant squared correlations between constructs (discriminant validity)
(Fornell & Larcker, 1981). Scale items, factor loadings, and item reliabilities appear in Table 1.
Table 2 reports descriptive statistics, correlations, and relevant reliability and validity measures for
the constructs under investigation.
4.6 | Manipulation and realism checks
To check whether the manipulation was successful, we first asked participants to indicate the
LPMESs they were confronted with from a list of the four alternative strategies. In total, 92% ofLUOMA
12
TABLE 1
ET AL .
Scale items for construct measures
Construct (source)
Factor loading a
Item reliability b
Perceived aggressiveness (Heil & Walters, 1993; Hultink & Langerak, 2002; Robertson et al., 1995)
Beta’s market entry is very aggressive 0.83 0.59
Beta’s primary goal is to acquire a large share of the market 0.81 0.77
Beta’s entry is aimed to gain sales at my expense 0.76 0.43
Perceived commitment (Hultink & Langerak, 2002)
I believe Beta has invested a lot of time and energy in their market entry 0.88 0.47
I believe managers at Beta have high expectations toward their product 0.83 0.75
If Alpha would not react at all, Alpha would lose considerable market share 0.91 0.81
If Alpha would not react at all, Alpha would lose revenue 0.94 0.95
If Alpha would not react at all, Alpha would lose sales 0.91 0.82
Perceived consequence (Heil & Walters, 1993; Hultink & Langerak, 2002)
a Result of exploratory factor analysis.
b Result of confirmatory factor analysis.
participants checked the correct strategy, indicating a successful manipulation. We also checked for
the manipulations of the context variables with three items (1 = do not agree, 7 = fully agree):
“The competitive product is a substantial innovation compared to my product ‘Alpha’” (product
innovativeness), “Price is an important decision criterion for customers in the market for specialized
screws” (price sensitivity), and “‘Alpha’ currently has a small share in the market for specialized
screws” (incumbent market share). All manipulation checks are significant in the intended direction,
and point to large effects 2 : product innovativeness (M low = 2.52, M high = 5.36; F(1, 863) = 571.27,
p = .00, η 2 = 0.40), incumbent market share (M small = 5.30, M large = 2.97; F(1, 863) = 359.65, p
= .00, η 2 = 0.29), and price sensitivity (M low = 3.43, M high = 5.84; F(1, 863) = 404.93, p = .00,
η 2 = 0.32). Finally, we also asked participants to indicate whether they perceived the scenario as
realistic and easily imaginable (1 = do not agree, 7 = fully agree). The ratings on realism and ease
of imagination are sufficiently high (M realism = 5.56; M ease of imagination = 5.78), and unaffected by
their functional backgrounds (F(7, 648) = 1.34, p = .23, η 2 = 0.01; F(7, 648) = 1.64, p = .12,
η 2 = 0.02).
5 | RESULTS
5.1 | Tests of hypotheses
To test our hypotheses, we conducted structural equation modeling (SEM) with a maximum likeli-
hood (ML) estimator using STATA 15.1. First, we estimated a model with perceived aggressiveness
(H1), perceived commitment (H2), and perceived consequence (H3) as latent independent variables
and the incumbent’s price response as the dependent variable. Second, we estimated another model
in which we controlled for the entry strategy context by including three dummy variables for the
entrant’s product innovativeness, customer price sensitivity, and the incumbents market share as
well as for the entrant’s LPMES by including three dummy variables for introductory pricing, bonus
pricing, and a PMG. Finally, as robustness check we estimated corresponding regression models
An effect size of η 2 = 0.01 is considered “small”; η 2 = 0.06, “medium”; and η 2 = 0.14, “large” (Cohen, 1988, p. 284).
2−0.08
−0.01 −0.03
1.00
market
disagree
.10
LUOMA ET AL .
1314
LUOMA
ET AL .
with an ordinary least squares (OLS) estimator and heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors (see
Table 3). In the regression model, we used means across construct items to capture perceived
aggressiveness, commitment, and consequence.
When looking at the basic structural equation model, the results clearly show that the greater the
perceived aggressiveness of the entry, the higher the incumbent’s chosen price level (B = 0.09, β
= 0.31, p = .00). In other words, the response of the incumbent is weaker in situations where the
perceived aggressiveness of the entrant is higher. Thus, we find support for Hypothesis 1. Results
point to the opposite effect for perceived commitment: The greater the perceived commitment, the
stronger the price response, that is, the lower the chosen price level (B = −0.06, β = −0.18, p
= .00). Therefore, Hypothesis 2 is supported. In line with Hypothesis 3, an increase in perceived
consequence leads to a stronger price response. The higher the perceived consequence, the lower the
incumbent’s chosen price level (B = −0.09, β = −0.40, p = .00). The results with additional con-
trol variables show that introductory pricing and bonus pricing diminish the incumbent’s responses,
relative to penetration pricing, through mechanisms beyond those hypothesized or measured. The
incumbent’s market share also reduces its price response. The entrant’s product innovativeness and
customer price sensitivity, in turn, lead to stronger price responses through some mechanisms that
are not captured by the constructs in Hypotheses 1–3. That being said, adding these control variables
does not have a dramatic effect on the path or regression coefficients used to test Hypotheses 1–3,
which reinforce our confidence in them.
5.2 | Cues embedded in the entry strategy
The four LPMESs foster different assessments concerning the entrant’s aggressiveness and commit-
ment, which in turn, influence the incumbent firm’s competitive response. In other words, by introduc-
ing relatively minor variations to the LPMES (e.g., coupling a low price with a PMG), the entrant may
foster perceptions regarding themselves in the minds of the incumbent firm’s managers (e.g., high
levels of aggressiveness), which subsequently de-motivate strong competitive responses to entry.
More specifically, we assessed the impact of our manipulations (LPMES and the contextual vari-
ables) on perceived aggressiveness, commitment, and consequence. For each of these dependent vari-
ables, we computed planned contrasts between penetration pricing and the three other LPMESs. That
is, penetration pricing was used as the benchmark for other LPMESs. We also ran a multivariate anal-
ysis of variance (MANOVA) for the joint effects of the independent on the three dependent variables.
We focus on the main effects and the two-way interactions between the LPMESs and the three con-
text variables. We exclude higher-order interactions and interactions between the context variables. 3
Including these interactions does not affect our theoretical conclusions, and only four out of these
24 additional interactions are significant at p < .05. Table 4 presents the ANOVA and MANOVA
results. Descriptive statistics in the different experimental conditions are indicated in Appendix S1.
With respect to perceived aggressiveness, the results show a significant main effect for the
entrant’s LPMES (F[3, 849] = 8.87, p = .01, η 2 = 0.03). Planned contrasts indicate that incumbents
perceive introductory pricing as more aggressive than penetration pricing (contrast = 0.28; 95% con-
fidence interval [0.05; 0.50]; F[1, 849] = 5.99, p = .01). The same holds for PMGs (contrast
= 0.35; 95% confidence interval [0.13; 0.57]; F[1, 849] = 9.70, p = .00). The perceived aggressive-
ness of bonus pricing is not significantly different from penetration pricing (contrast = −0.16; 95%
confidence interval [−0.38; 0.07]; F[1, 849] = 1.91, p = .17).
3
We thank an anonymous reviewer for this suggestion.sensitivity:
−0.08
.00
LUOMA ET AL .
15LUOMA
16
ET AL .
Incumbent’s perceived threat of market entry and price reaction depending on LPMES and the entry strategy
context: ANOVA and Multivariate ANOVA results
TABLE 4
ANOVA: Dependent variable
Perceived
aggressiveness
Multivariate ANOVA
Perceived
commitment
p η 2 A: Entrant’s LPMES 8.87 .00 0.03 2.52 .06 0.01 1.42 .24 0.00 4.24 .00
B: Entrant’s product
innovativeness 0.03 .86 0.00 36.17 .00 0.04 10.01 .00 0.01 16.74 .00
C: Customer price sensitivity 6.89 .01 0.01 2.79 .10 0.00 29.79 .00 0.03 10.00 .00
D: Incumbent market share 2.15 .14 0.00 0.05 .82 0.00 1.43 .23 0.00 2.34 .07
1.90 .13 0.01 1.64 .18 0.01 1.05 .37 0.00 2.08 .03
F
η 2
F
p
η 2
Wilks’s
lambda F
F
Independent variables
p
Perceived
consequence
p
Main effects
Interaction effects
A×B
A×C 1.32 .27 0.00 0.39 .76 0.00 1.16 .32 0.00 1.40 .18
A×D 0.07 .97 0.00 0.85 .47 0.00 0.62 .60 0.00 0.64 .76
Note. Two-tailed tests, n = 865.
The incumbent’s perception of the commitment of the entrant is marginally affected by the
entrant’s LPMES (F[3, 849] = 2.52, p = .06, η 2 = 0.01). Planned contrasts show that the perceived
commitment of the entrant is lower for bonus pricing than for penetration pricing (contrast = −0.28;
95% confidence interval [−0.52; −0.05]; F[1, 849] = 5.54, p = .02). However, perceived commit-
ment is not significantly different for introductory pricing (contrast = 0.01; 95% confidence interval
[−0.23; 0.24]; F[1, 846] = 0.00, p = .96) or a PMG (contrast = −0.10, 95% confidence interval
[−0.33; 0.14]; F[1, 846] = 0.63, p = .43). With regard to the perceived consequence of the entry,
the results do not indicate a significant effect of the entrant’s LPMES (F[3, 849] = 1.42, p = .24,
η 2 = 0.00). The same holds for all planned contrasts (p > .05). However, bonus pricing is perceived
marginally less consequential than penetration pricing (contrast = −0.27; 95% confidence interval
[−0.55; 0.01]; F[1, 846] = 3.50, p = .06). Some managers may expect that reducing unit prices
through offering a bonus has a smaller effect on the sales than a price cut, due to the diminishing
marginal utility effect on the demand side.
No significant interactions were found between the LPMESs and contextual conditions tested.
Thus, the salience of the cues of aggressiveness and commitment embedded in the alternative
LPMESs does not depend on the contextual conditions tested.
Finally, the main effects of the three entry context variables on managers’ threat perceptions are
rather intuitive. The innovativeness of the entrant’s product positively affects the perceived commit-
ment of the entrant (F[1, 849] = 36.17, p = .00, η 2 = 0.04). An innovative product is likely to be
associated with greater subjective belief in the possibility of success. Knowing this, incumbent
firm’s managers are likely to believe that the entrant is committed to the market. Innovativeness also
affects perceived consequence of the entry (F[1, 849] = 10.01, p = .00, η 2 = 0.01). Customers’
price sensitivity has a positive effect on the perceived aggressiveness of the entrant (F
[1, 849] = 6.89, p = .01, η 2 = 0.01). Since the competitive instrument of the entrant is price in all
manipulations, price sensitivity of the customers makes the aggressiveness of the entrant more
salient. Customers’ price sensitivity is also associated with perceptions of high consequence (F
[1, 849] = 29.79, p = .00, η 2 = 0.03). The incumbent’s market share does not significantly affect
any of the threat perceptions (p > .10). However, market share diminishes the strength of theLUOMA ET AL .
17
incumbent’s response (Table 3), possibly because a high market share is reflected in a reduced
salience of growth goals, and increased motivation to conserve margins (Greve, 2008).
5.3 | Discussion of effect sizes and managerial impact
It is also interesting to investigate the magnitude of effects we observe (e.g., Combs, 2010). 4 Most
important, the results show that a firm that is successful in influencing the incumbent firm’s percep-
tions of the entrant’s aggressiveness and commitment can substantially attenuate the intensity of the
incumbent’s response to entry. The standardized path coefficients in the SEM are moderate at 0.27
(aggressiveness) and −0.15 (commitment) in the model with all control variables (Table 3). The
unstandardized coefficients indicate that a unit increase in perceived aggressiveness in terms of one
Likert-scale point leads to about €0.08 decrease in the strength of the incumbent’s price response. A
unit decrease in perceived commitment is associated with a reduction of response strength by
€0.05. 5 A unit increase in perceived aggressiveness (or decrease in perceived commitment) leads to
a 20% (13%) reduction in the intensity of the incumbent firm’s price response, compared to the aver-
age price cut of €0.40.
Since the effect sizes (see planned contrasts above) relating to the impact of the LPMESs on per-
ceived aggressiveness and commitment are between 0.28 and 0.35, the choice of entry strategy can
attenuate the incumbent’s price response by €0.01 to €0.03. This corresponds to about 4–7% attenu-
ation of the incumbent’s price response. This effect size is not dramatic, yet quite intuitive given the
subtlety of cues embedded in the LPMES-manipulations.
When considering the effect sizes, it is important to note that an attenuation of the incumbent’s
price response by just few percent from the average can have substantial implications for the entrant.
This is because of the lessened future downward pressure on the entrant’s prices caused by the
higher incumbent firm price. This has immediate economic implications for the entrant firm as well
as longer-term implications for the industry in terms of reducing the likelihood of a price war
(e.g., Heil & Helsen, 2001). The ability to avoid even small price drops can have substantially large
effects on firm profits. Marn and Rosiello (1992) argued on the basis of COMPUSTAT data that a
1% increase in price leads to an 11% increase in operating profits, other things being equal. Hinter-
huber (2004) argued on the basis of a sample of Fortune 500 firms that a 5% increase in price leads
to a 22% increase earnings before interests and taxes. Such gains in profitability are of great impor-
tance for entrants during their early, precarious, and resource-scarce years in the market. Conse-
quently, even seemingly modest effect sizes as indicated by our study can thus have significant
economic implications for the entering firm. The choice between LPMESs matters.
5.4 | Replication study with a student sample
To investigate the robustness of our results, we conducted a second experiment with university stu-
dents. 6 This experiment was essentially a replication of the experiment reported above. 7 We wanted
to see which aspects of our theoretical model would replicate in a very different sample of
4
We thank an anonymous reviewer for directing our attention to this important matter.
These effect sizes are slightly larger than those obtained with ordinary least squares regression: €0.05 and −€0.03.
6
We appreciate the comments of an anonymous reviewer who gave us the inspiration to collect these data.
7
Besides the pure replication, we also tested alternative operationalizations of introductory pricing (changing the duration of the pro-
motion period, and the price level after the promotion period). Briefly, we found that the post-promotion price level significantly
(marginally significantly) influences the perceived consequence of the entry (aggressiveness of the entrant). The duration of the pro-
motion period does not have a significant main effect on any of the threat perceptions. Moreover, adding these manipulations to the
data set when testing Hypotheses 1–3 does not change our conclusions. Detailed results will be provided by the authors on request.
518
LUOMA
ET AL .
participants. The replication is also interesting because researchers often rely on student samples to
test hypotheses about managerial behavior (e.g., Gary, Wood, & Pillinger, 2012).
We describe here only the most essential characteristics and findings of the replication study.
The details of the experiment are available in Appendix S1. The student sample was collected using
a commercial data provider in the spring of 2016. The usable sample size was 1,070 students with
an average age of 23.6 years (median 23 years). The educational background of the students was
heterogeneous, with 12% representing business.
The results reveal that the hypothesized effects of perceived aggressiveness and commitment as
well as the impact of perceived consequence were qualitatively similar to the results obtained with
the manager sample. All relevant path coefficients in the structural equation models are statistically
significant (in the regression models, the largest p = .05) with expected signs. Thus, the impact of
perceived aggressiveness, commitment, and consequence on the incumbent firm’s price response is
robust. It seems that people are relatively “hard wired” to guide their choice between confrontational
versus evasive behaviors based on assessments of entrant’s behavioral traits and entry consequences.
However, the effects of the alternative LPMES on perceived aggressiveness and commitment are
not statistically significant (p > .10), whereas perceived consequence is shaped by the LPMES (F[3,
1,051] = 3.80, p = .01, η 2 = 0.01). In other words, the students read the cues embedded in the
LPMESs differently than managers.
6 | D IS CU S S I ON A ND CO N CLU S I ON
6.1 | Contributions
Our study offers three contributions to strategic management scholarship and practice. First, this
research illuminates how entrants can reduce the intensity of incumbent firm responses when using
market entry strategies (e.g., LPMESs) intended to foster rapid sales growth. Our results suggest that
entrants can do this by adjusting their entry strategies to signal high aggressiveness or low commit-
ment. Since aggressiveness and commitment are distinct dimensions from the perceived conse-
quence of the entry, the findings help understand why incumbents may sometimes decide against
strong retaliatory moves, even when the entry is perceived as highly consequential (cf. Chen et al.,
2007; Chen & Miller, 1994; Derfus et al., 2008). In so doing, the results advance our understanding
of why firms sometimes decide against (strong) counterattack-type responses to significant competi-
tive threats (e.g., Wang & Shaver, 2014; see also Keil, Laamanen, & McGrath, 2013).
Second, we clarify the cognitive mechanisms underlying incumbent responses to market entry.
The incumbent’s competitive response hinges on managers’ perceptions regarding the (short-term)
sales and market share impact of the entry (i.e., perceived consequence). However, the incumbent
firm managers also consider the longer-term behavioral intentions of the entrant (i.e., aggressiveness
and commitment). While prior competitive dynamics literature in and outside the market entry con-
text has considered these three perceptual domains, extant studies seldom view the constructs side
by side (e.g., Chen & Miller, 1994; Fan, 2010; Ferrier, 2001; McCann & Vroom, 2010; McGrath
et al., 1998). Our theoretical framework and hypotheses extend existing knowledge by carefully
specifying the internal logic of the three perceptual threat constructs and elaborating on how they
differ in terms of driving incumbent firm response. For example, it may seem contradictory that
some studies associate forceful market entries with strong incumbent reactions (Chen & Miller,
1994), while others have argued exactly the opposite (Fan, 2010). Our results clarify that different
mechanisms are operative here; in the first instance, the responding firm acts on the basis ofLUOMA ET AL .
19
perceived consequence, while in the latter case, the perceived aggressiveness of the entrant drives
response-related decision-making.
Third, it is often assumed that firms’ competitive actions may embed cues that shape the respond-
ing firm managers’ competitive reasoning, and consequently, their responses to competitive threats
(e.g., Chen & MacMillan, 1992; Fan, 2010; McGrath et al., 1998); for example, an action may signal
to the responding firm that the initiating firm is aggressive. However, such assumptions are seldom
subjected to direct empirical tests (cf. Miller & Tsang, 2011), and are rather inferred from observa-
tional data. Our experimental approach offers a way to directly test how embedded cues influence the
cognitions of incumbent firm managers and their consequent competitive response decisions.
We find some support for the cue approach. According to the empirical evidence, managers per-
ceive entrants that used PMGs or introductory pricing as more aggressive than entrants that relied
on penetration pricing. PMGs seem to possess an additional cue of aggressiveness likely caused by
the conditional promise of further price cuts to win customers, regardless of profit impact. Similarly,
introductory pricing displays the entrant’s willingness to sacrifice short-term profits for market
share, a characteristic trait of an aggressive firm (Lumpkin & Dess, 1996). Introductory pricing also
increases the cognitive salience of the price difference between the entrant and the incumbent, even
if this remains transient. Conversely, relative to penetration pricing, managers perceive bonus pric-
ing as a signal of low commitment. The use of bonus pricing might indicate the entrant’s attempt to
differentiate from the incumbent by targeting a poorly catered segment of customers (i.e., customers
wishing to purchase in larger quantities). Such evasive maneuvering could imply the entrant’s low
commitment to meet the incumbent head on (Krider & Weinberg, 1998). These signaling effects
helped PMGs, introductory pricing and bonus pricing to attenuate the incumbent’s response to entry.
However, the follow-up experimental study with university students did not reproduce the effects of
LPMESs on the threat perceptions of the incumbent. Different interpretations of the cues are not
wholly surprising, given the general lack of business experience in the student sample. Experience
seems central to the cognitive mechanisms that shape the incumbent firm’s managers’ interpretation
of the cues embedded in the LPMESs.
6.2 | Directions for future research
Our study points to several future research opportunities. First, our work opens new avenues for
explaining how and why competitors respond to competitive threats, or refrain from doing so. In
particular, the distinctions we make between the perceptions concerning the entrant (in terms of
aggressiveness and commitment) and consequences of the market entry add theoretical granularity
to our understanding of the cognitive foundations of competitive response. Besides market entry
contexts, this more granular view could help explain differences in the response propensities of
firms in Red Queen-type rivalries (Derfus et al., 2008) as well as the build-up and maintenance of
mutual forbearance in multimarket competition (Yu & Cannella, 2013).
Second, our experimental results regarding the impact of LPMESs on perceived aggressiveness,
commitment, and consequence raises interesting questions for future research. On the one hand, the
results indicate that different variants (e.g., bonus pricing versus penetration pricing) of the same gen-
eral entry strategy (i.e., low-price entry) can indeed induce cueing effects that shape incumbent firm
managers’ cognitions, and consequently, their competitive response. We offered some potential rea-
sons for the empirical results, but a more detailed measurement of cognitions would be needed to get
to the bottom of the theoretical mechanics of the cueing effects observed. On the other hand, the dif-
ferences in the results obtained with the manager and student samples calls attention to the fact that
cueing effects are likely to be context-dependent. This should not come as a large surprise, given that20
LUOMA
ET AL .
prior knowledge and experience are so important to the interpretation of marketplace signals. More
generally, individual differences and contextual factors are likely to matter a great deal in determining
how managers interpret the cues embedded in the actions of their rivals (cf. Cesario, 2014).
Third, our research provides the basis for studying entry-related competitive actions as signaling
tools vis-à-vis incumbents more generally. For instance, future research could seek to identify how
competitive actions, beyond pricing, could be embedded with cues of aggressiveness or (the lack
of ) commitment. Positioning a new product using superlatives such as “top of the line” or “best
value” communicates value to customers. However, to incumbents, this also signals aggressiveness
in a particular dimension of competition (e.g., quality, price/quality). Competition among incum-
bents might also involve the use of such signals. However, this is more difficult, given that the firms
know each other better.
Fourth, our research shows that there is promise in studying competitive signaling from a behav-
ioral perspective. While standard economic theory of signaling assumes that the senders and recipi-
ents of competitive cues are fully rational, firms in fact “often misread each other’s signals”
(Zajac & Bazerman, 1991, p. 45). For example, future research might explore potential signaling
trade-offs. Prior research has hypothesized that building significant production capacity might signal
aggressiveness to incumbent firms, which can, in turn, deter them from attacking the entrant (Fan,
2010). However, the unintended effect of a large-scale production capacity could be that incumbents
will also come to perceive the entrant as highly committed because of the associated irrecoverable
costs, with exactly the opposite effect on the incumbent’s motivation to attack the entrant. Along
these lines, it would be interesting to examine, from a cognitive perspective, what causes managers
to treat an action as a one kind of signal instead of another. While our experimental evidence indi-
cates that entrants might be able to signal high aggressiveness (or low commitment) without simulta-
neously evoking perceptions of high commitment (or low aggressiveness), it would be interesting to
look for additional evidence of this using other research designs (e.g., field studies, archival data).
Finally, our experimental setup has several limitations that provide opportunities for future
research. We evaluated incumbent firm managers’ perceptions using three dimensions: aggressive-
ness, commitment, and consequence. Future studies could address additional aspects such as credi-
bility (Robertson et al., 1995) and reputation (Prabhu & Stewart, 2001) of the entrant. It would also
be interesting to compare the signaling effects produced by subtle behavioral cues (such as those
embedded in the LPMESs) to not-so-subtle signals such as making large, irreversible resource com-
mitments. The latter way of signaling is costly, and hence, should produce much larger and more
robust signaling effects than those uncovered here to make normative sense. Additionally, other con-
textual moderators influencing cue interpretation—for instance, market dependence (Chen & Miller,
1994) or product market overlap (Chen, 1996)—would be interesting to consider. We also limited
our experiment to one period, the incumbents’ initial responses. Future studies could examine sev-
eral periods after market entry to analyze not only short-, but also long-term, effects of entry pricing.
This could be achieved, for example, with the help of a simulated market environment (Chen et al.,
2010). Understanding the longer-term effects of different competitive responses is important, not
only for the involved firms, but also for competition authorities safeguarding consumer interests
(Cattani, Porac, & Thomas, 2017).
ACKNOWLEDGEMEN TS
We are grateful for Tobias Kretschmer’s excellent guidance as the editor of our article. We also
wish to acknowledge the invaluable work of three anonymous reviewers as well as Jan Klein’sLUOMA ET AL .
21
contribution to the data collection effort. Finally, the article benefited from the comments of the
reviewers and audience at the Academy of Management Annual Meeting, Anaheim (CA), 2016.
REFERENCES
Amit, R., Domowitz, I., & Fershtman, C. (1988). Thinking one step ahead: The use of conjectures in competitor analysis. Strategic
Management Journal, 9(5), 431–442.
Armstrong, J., & Collopy, F. (1996). Competitor orientation: Effects of objectives and information on managerial decisions and profit-
ability. Journal of Marketing Research, 33(2), 188–199.
Artinger, S., & Powell, T. (2016). Entrepreneurial failure: Statistical and psychological explanations. Strategic Management Journal,
37(6), 1047–1064.
Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human memory: A proposed system and its control processes. In K. W. Spence &
J. T. Spence (Eds.), Psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 2, pp. 89–195). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Bagozzi, R. P., & Yi, Y. (1988). On the evaluation of structural equation models. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
16(1), 74–94.
Baum, J., & Korn, H. (1996). Competitive dynamics of interfirm rivalry. Academy of Management Journal, 39(2), 255–291.
Cain, D., Moore, D., & Haran, U. (2015). Making sense of overconfidence in market entry. Strategic Management Journal, 51(2),
315–334.
Carré, J. M., McCormick, C. M., & Mondloch, C. J. (2009). Facial structure is a reliable cue of aggressive behavior. Psychological
Science, 20(10), 1194–1198.
Cattani, G., Porac, J. F., & Thomas, H. (2017). Categories and competition. Strategic Management Journal, 38(1), 64–92.
Cesario, J. (2014). Priming, replication, and the hardest science. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 9(1), 40–48.
Chen, E. L., Katila, R., McDonald, R., & Eisenhardt, K. M. (2010). Life in the fast lane: Origins of competitive interaction in new
vs. established markets. Strategic Management Journal, 31(13), 1527–1547.
Chen, M.-J. (1996). Competitor analysis and interfirm rivalry: Toward a theoretical integration. Academy of Management Review,
21(1), 100–134.
Chen, M.-J., & Hambrick, D. (1995). Speed, stealth, and selective attack: How small firms differ from large firms in competitive
behavior. Academy of Management Journal, 38(2), 453–482.
Chen, M.-J., Lin, H., & Michel, J. (2010). Navigating in a hypercompetitive environment: The roles of action aggressiveness and
TMT integration. Strategic Management Journal, 31(13), 1410–1430.
Chen, M.-J., & MacMillan, I. C. (1992). Nonresponse and delayed response to competitive moves: The roles of competitor depen-
dence and action irreversibility. Academy of Management Journal, 35(3), 539–570.
Chen, M.-J., & Miller, D. (1994). Competitive attack, retaliation and performance: An expectancy‐valence framework. Strategic Man-
agement Journal, 15(2), 85–102.
Chen, M.-J., Smith, K., & Grimm, C. (1992). Action characteristics as predictors of competitive responses. Management Science,
38(3), 439–455.
Chen, M.-J., Su, K.-H., & Tsai, W. (2007). Competitive tension: The awarenss-motivation-capability perspective. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 50(1), 101–118.
Churchill, G. A. (1979). A paradigm for developing better measures of marketing constructs. Journal of Marketing Research, 16(1),
64–73.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Combs, J. (2010). From the editors: Big samples and small effects: let’s not trade relevance and rigor for power. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 53(1), 9–13.
Coyne, K. P., & Horn, J. (2009). Predicting your competitor’s reaction. Harvard Business Review, 87(4), 90–97.
Crilly, D., Ni, N., & Jiang, Y. (2016). Do-no-harm versus do-good social responsibility: Attributional thinking and the liability of for-
eignness. Strategic Management Journal, 37(7), 1316–1329.
Debruyne, M., Moenaertb, R., & Griffinc, A. (2002). The impact of new product launch strategies on competitive reaction in indus-
trial markets. Journal of Product, 19(2), 159–170.
Derfus, P. J., Maggitti, P. G., Grimm, C. M., & Smith, K. G. (2008). The red queen effect: Competitive actions and firm performance.
Academy of Management Journal, 51(1), 61–80.
Duarte, J., Siegel, S., & Young, L. (2012). Trust and credit: The role of appearance in peer-to-peer lending. Review of Financial Stud-
ies, 25(8), 2455–2483.
Dutta, S., Biswas, A., & Grewal, D. (2011). Regret from postpurchase discovery of lower market prices: Do price refunds help? Jour-
nal of Marketing, 75(6), 124–138.
Edlin, A. S., & Emch, E. R. (1999). Welfare losses from price-matching policies. Journal of Industrial Economics, 47(2), 145–167.
Evans, J. S. B. T. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of reasoning, judgment, and social cognition. Annual Review of Psychology,
59(1), 255–278.
Evans, J. S. B. T., & Stanovich, K. E. (2013). Dual-process theories of higher cognition. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8(3),
223–241.22
LUOMA
ET AL .
Fan, T. (2010). De novo venture strategy: Arch incumbency at inaugural entry. Strategic Management Journal, 31(1), 19–38.
Ferrier, W. J. (2001). Navigating the competitive landscape: The drivers and consequences of competitive aggressiveness. Academy
of Management Journal, 44(4), 858–877.
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. (1981). Structural equation models with unobservable variables and measurement error: Algebra and statis-
tics. Journal of Marketing Research, 18(1), 39–50.
Gallagher, H. L., Jack, A. I., Roepstorff, A., & Frith, C. D. (2002). Imaging the intentional stance in a competitive game. Neuro-
Image, 16(3), 814–821.
Gary, M., Wood, R., & Pillinger, T. (2012). Enhancing mental models, analogical transfer, and performance in strategic decision mak-
ing. Strategic Management Journal, 33(7), 1229–1246.
Gawronski, B., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2006). Associative and propositional processes in evaluation: An integrative review of
implicit and explicit attitude change. Psychological Bulletin, 132(5), 692–731.
Gerbing, D., & Anderson, J. (1988). An updated paradigm for scale development incorporating unidimensionality and its assessment.
Journal of Marketing Research, 25(2), 186–192.
Gimeno, J., & Woo, C. Y. (1996). Hypercompetition in a multimarket environment: The role of strategic similarity and multimarket
contact in competitive de-escalation. Organization Science, 7(3), 322–341.
Golden, B. (1992). The past is the past—Or is it? The use of retrospective accounts as indicators of past strategy. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 35(4), 848–860.
Greve, H. R. (1995). Jumping ship: The diffusion of strategy abandonment. Administrative Science Quarterly, 40(3), 444–473.
Greve, H. R. (2008). A behavioral theory of firm growth: Sequential attention to size and performance goals. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 51(3), 476–494.
Heggestad, A. A., & Rhoades, S. A. (1978). Multi-market interdependence and local market competition in banking. The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 60(4), 523–532.
Heil, O. P., & Helsen, K. (2001). Toward an understanding of price wars: Their nature and how they erupt. International Journal of
Research in Marketing, 18(1–2), 83–98.
Heil, O. P., & Robertson, T. S. (1991). Toward a theory of competitive market signaling: A research agenda. Strategic Management
Journal, 12(6), 403–418.
Heil, O. P., & Walters, R. G. (1993). Explaining competitive reactions to new products: An empirical signaling study. The Journal of
Product Innovation Management, 10(1), 53–65.
Hinterhuber, A. (2004). Towards value-based pricing: An integrative framework for decision making. Industrial Marketing Manage-
ment, 33(8), 765–778.
Horsky, D. (1990). A diffusion model incorporating product benefits, price, income and information. Marketing Science, 9(4),
342–365.
Hsieh, K., Tsai, W., & Chen, M.-J. (2015). If they can do it, why not us? Competitors as points for justifying escalation of commit-
ment. Academy of Management Journal, 58(1), 38–58.
Hultink, E., & Langerak, F. (2002). Launch decisions and competitive reactions: An exploratory market signaling study. Journal of
Product Innovation, 19(3), 199–212.
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and choice: Mapping bounded rationality. American Psychologist, 58(9), 697–720.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1972). Subjective probability: A judgment of representativeness. Cognitive Psychology, 3(3),
430–454.
Kalra, A., & Soberman, D. (2008). The curse of competitiveness: How advice from experienced colleagues and training can hurt mar-
keting profitability. Journal of Marketing, 72(3), 32–47.
Keil, T., Laamanen, T., & McGrath, R. G. (2013). Is a counterattack the best defense? Competitive dynamics through acquisitions.
Long Range Planning, 46(3), 195–215.
Kilduff, G. J., Elfenbein, H. A., & Staw, B. M. (2010). The psychology of rivalry: A relationally-dependent analysis of competition.
Academy of Management Journal, 53(5), 943–969.
Krider, R. E., & Weinberg, C. B. (1998). Competitive dynamics and the introduction of new products: The motion picture timing
game. Journal of Marketing Research, 35(1), 1–15.
Kuester, S., Homburg, C., & Robertson, T. S. (1999). Retaliatory behavior to new product entry. Journal of Marketing, 63(4),
90–106.
Lumpkin, G. T., & Dess, G. G. (1996). Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation construct and linking it to performance. Academy of
Management Review, 21(1), 135–172.
Lumpkin, G. T., & Dess, G. G. (2001). Linking two dimensions of entrepreneurial orientation to firm performance: The moderating
role of environment and industry life cycle. Journal of Business Venturing, 16(5), 429–451.
Luoma, J., Ruutu, S., King, A., & Tikkanen, H. (2017). Time delays, competitive interdependence, and firm performance. Strategic
Management, 37(1), 116–132.
Marcel, J., Barr, P., & Duhaime, I. (2011). The influence of executive cognition on competitive dynamics. Strategic Management,
32(2), 115–138.
Marn, M. V., & Rosiello, R. L. (1992). Managing price, gaining profit. Harvard Business Review, 70(5), 84–94.
McCann, B., & Vroom, G. (2010). Pricing response to entry and agglomeration effects. Strategic Management Journal, 31(3),
284–305.LUOMA ET AL .
23
McGrath, R. G., Chen, M.-J., & Macmillan, I. C. (1998). Multimarket maneuvering in uncertain spheres of influence: Resource diver-
sion strategies. Academy of Management Review, 23(4), 724–740.
Miller, K., & Tsang, E. (2011). Testing management theories: Critical realist philosophy and research methods. Strategic Management
Journal, 32(2), 139–158.
Montgomery, D., Moore, M., & Urbany, J. (2005). Reasoning about competitive reactions: Evidence from executives. Marketing Sci-
ence, 24(1), 138–149.
Nadkarni, S., Chen, T., & Chen, J. (2016). The clock is ticking! Executive temporal depth, industry velocity, and competitive aggres-
siveness. Strategic Management Journal, 37(6), 1132–1153.
Noble, P. M., & Gruca, T. S. (1999). Industrial pricing: Theory practice and managerial. Marketing Science, 18(3), 435–454.
Powell, T., Lovallo, D., & Fox, C. (2011). Behavioral strategy. Strategic Management Journal, 32(13), 1369–1386.
Prabhu, J., & Stewart, D. W. (2001). Signaling strategies in competitive interaction: Building reputations and hiding the truth. Journal
of Marketing Research, 38(1), 62–72.
Robertson, T., Eliashberg, J., & Rymon, T. (1995). New product announcement signals and incumbent reactions. Journal of Market-
ing, 59(3), 1–15.
Robinson, W. (1988). Marketing mix reactions to entry. Marketing Science, 7(4), 368–385.
Robinson, W. T., & Min, S. (2002). Is the first to market the first to fail? Empirical evidence for industrial goods businesses. Journal
of Marketing Research, 39(1), 120–128.
Shah, R., & Swaminathan, V. (2008). Factors influencing partner selection in strategic alliances: The moderating role of alliance con-
text. Strategic Management Journal, 29(5), 471–494.
Simon, D. (2005). Incumbent pricing responses to entry. Strategic Management Journal, 26(13), 1229–1248.
Spann, M., Fischer, M., & Tellis, G. J. (2015). Skimming or penetration? Strategic dynamic pricing for new products. Marketing Sci-
ence, 34(2), 235–249.
Sterman, J. D., Henderson, R., Beinhocker, E. D., & Newman, L. I. (2007). Getting big too fast : Strategic dynamics with increasing
returns and bounded rationality, Management Science, 53(4), 683–696.
Tellis, G. (1986). Beyond the many faces of price: An integration of pricing strategies. Journal of Marketing, 50(4), 146–160.
Tsai, W., Su, K.-H., & Chen, M.-J. (2011). Seeing through the eyes of a rival: Competitor acumen based on rival-centric perceptions.
Academy of Management Journal, 54(4), 761–778.
Wang, R., & Shaver, J. (2014). Competition-driven repositioning. Strategic Management Journal, 35(11), 1585–1604.
Yu, T., & Cannella, A. A. (2013). A comprehensive review of multimarket competition research. Journal of Management, 39(1),
76–109.
Zajac, E. J., & Bazerman, M. H. (1991). Blind spots in industry and competitor analysis: Implications of interfirm (mis)perceptions
for strategic decisions. Academy of Management Review, 16(1), 37–56.
SU PPORTI NG I NFORMATION
Additional Supporting Information may be found online in the supporting information tab for this
article.
How to cite this article: Luoma J, Falk T, Totzek D, Tikkanen H, Mrozek A. Big splash, no
waves? Cognitive mechanisms driving incumbent firms’ responses to low-price market entry
strategies. Strat Mgmt J. 2018;1–23. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2763