This article was downloaded by: [128.103.149.52] On: 19 September 2017, At: 11:14
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA
Organization Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
Multiple Identity Configurations: The Benefits of Focused
Enhancement for Prosocial Behavior
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9979-5354Lakshmi Ramarajan, Ida E. Berger, Itay Greenspan
To cite this article:
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9979-5354Lakshmi Ramarajan, Ida E. Berger, Itay Greenspan (2017) Multiple Identity
Configurations: The Benefits of Focused Enhancement for Prosocial Behavior. Organization Science 28(3):495-513. https://
doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2017.1129
Full terms and conditions of use: http://pubsonline.informs.org/page/terms-and-conditions
This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use
or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher
approval, unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.
The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or
support of claims made of that product, publication, or service.
Copyright © 2017, INFORMS
Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages
INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research, management
science, and analytics.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.orgORGANIZATION SCIENCE
Vol. 28, No. 3, May–June 2017, pp. 495–513
ISSN 1047-7039 (print), ISSN 1526-5455 (online)
http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/orsc/
Multiple Identity Configurations: The Benefits of Focused
Enhancement for Prosocial Behavior
Lakshmi Ramarajan, a Ida E. Berger, b Itay Greenspan c
a Harvard
Business School, Boston, Massachusetts 02163; b Ted Rogers School of Business Management, Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario
M5B 2K3, Canada; c Paul Baerwald School of Social Work and Social Welfare, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Mt. Scopus, Jerusalem 91905,
Israel
Contact: lramarajan@hbs.edu,
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9979-5354 (LR); bergeri@ryerson.ca (IEB); itaygree@mail.huji.ac.il (IG)
Received: May 16, 2014
Revised: July 31, 2015; February 28, 2016;
September 2, 2016; November 2, 2016;
December 19, 2016
Accepted: January 13, 2017
Published Online in Articles in Advance:
May 23, 2017
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2017.1129
Copyright: © 2017 INFORMS
Abstract. This paper introduces a configurational approach to the study of multiple iden-
tities. Specifically, it examines how prosocial identity combines with collective and indi-
vidualistic identities in conflicting and enhancing ways to affect prosocial behavior in
organizational settings. We examine an unexplored intuition in the multiple identities
literature that when all identities are enhancing (a mutual enhancement configuration),
it will be best for prosocial outcomes. Our results show, however—across two field stud-
ies and two experiments—that enhancement between prosocial and collective identities
(a focused enhancement configuration) results in the highest levels of prosocial behav-
ior. Furthermore, we trace this result to the greater self-serving orientation activated in a
mutual enhancement configuration, where one’s individualistic identity enhances one’s
other identities. Our work demonstrates the value of a configurational approach to the
study of multiple identities, and it challenges the assumption that a mutual enhancement
configuration is always desirable.
Supplemental Material: The online appendix is available at https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2017.1129.
Keywords: identity • identity configurations • multiple identities • prosocial behavior
Introduction
aspects of the self-concept and include those parts
of the self that are in a giving or helping relation-
ship with others (Grant and Dutton 2012, Piliavin and
Callero 1991). In this paper, we examine how individu-
als’ prosocial, individualistic, and collective identities
combine to affect their prosocial behavior.
The perspective we take hinges on understanding
how individuals experience their multiple identities.
Building on past research showing that two iden-
tities can be related in conflicting (Benet-Martinez
and Haritatos 2005, Greenhaus and Beutell 1985) or
enhancing ways (Dutton et al. 2010, Rothbard and
Ramarajan 2009), we take a novel, configurational
approach to multiple identity research, examining
patterns of conflict and enhancement among three
identities. Moreover, we investigate an unexplored
intuition in the multiple identities literature that multi-
ple identities will be most effective for outcomes when
they are all mutually enhancing, because the full set
of meanings, values, and behaviors associated with
one’s identities can be applied to a task (Ashforth 2007,
Dutton et al. 2010, Pratt and Foreman 2000). By explic-
itly considering all three specific types of identities
(prosocial, collective, and individualistic), we question
this assumption, both theoretically and empirically.
Instead, we propose that a person with an identity
configuration characterized by focused enhancement (in
which prosocial and collective identities are mutually
Prosocial behavior—behavior that protects, promotes
or contributes to the welfare of others (Grant 2007)—is
crucial for organizations and societies to function well.
Organizations have sought to promote prosocial behav-
ior by activating their members’ prosocial identities—
identities such as “mentor” or “volunteer”—that orient
a person toward helping others (Piliavin and Callero
1991, Grant et al. 2008). Yet, a person’s prosocial identity
does not exist in a vacuum. Scholars have long recog-
nized that people have multiple identities (James 1890).
Organizations are a fertile context for the activation of
their members’ multiple identities, not just prosocial
identities, but also individualistic and collective identi-
ties (Bartel 2001, Blader 2007). However, little research
has examined how multiple identities affect prosocial
behavior, particularly in organizational contexts.
Individualistic and collective identities are funda-
mental aspects of the self-concept and therefore espe-
cially important to examine in combination with
prosocial identities (Brewer and Gardner 1996). Indi-
vidualistic identities are egoistic, “me” oriented
aspects of the self-concept and include idiosyncratic
personal characteristics such as “trailblazer” or “star.”
Collective identities are “we” oriented aspects of the
self-concept, and include one’s group memberships,
such as ethnic or professional affiliations (Brewer and
Gardner 1996). Prosocial identities are “you” oriented
495496
enhancing but both are unrelated to an individual-
istic identity) will exhibit higher levels of prosocial
behavior than a person with an identity configuration
characterized by mutual enhancement (mutual enhance-
ment among all three identities—prosocial, collective,
and individualistic). Across two field studies and two
experiments, we consistently find that identity config-
urations of focused enhancement between prosocial and
collective identities result in higher prosocial outcomes
than configurations of mutual enhancement among all
three identities. Our work contributes to research on
both multiple identities and prosocial behavior by
demonstrating the value of a configurational approach
that highlights the importance of the specific types of
identities that enhance one another, rather than assum-
ing that mutual enhancement is always desirable.
Prosocial Behavior and Multiple Identities
Prosocial Behavior in Organizations
Prosocial behavior in organizational contexts captures
how organizational members engage with one another
as givers and receivers, as well as how they engage
with beneficiaries in the larger society. Prosocial orga-
nizational behavior is defined as behavior which is
“(a) performed by a member of an organization, (b)
directed toward an individual, group, or organization
with whom he or she interacts while carrying out his
or her organizational role and (c) performed with the
intention of promoting the welfare of the individual,
group, or organization toward which it is directed”
(Brief and Motowidlo 1986, p. 711). The organizational
importance of prosociality is evident from studies of
a wide range of behaviors, such as donating (O’Reilly
and Chatman 1986), volunteering (Grant and Sumanth
2009), and helping in groups (Blader and Tyler 2009)
as well as studies in a range of contexts, including vol-
untary organizations (Schaubroeck and Ganster 1991),
university alumni (O’Reilly and Chatman 1986), and
among employees who volunteer inside or outside
their organizations (Bartel 2001, Grant et al. 2008, Grant
and Sumanth 2009).
Identities: Types and Relationships
Identity Types. Identities, “the set of meanings that
define who one is” (Burke and Stets 2009, p. 3), are
a fundamental driver of individual behavior in orga-
nizations (Bartel et al. 2007). Individualistic identities
drive behaviors that promote one’s personal welfare
and goals; collective identities drive behaviors that
promote or stem from feelings of group belonging
(Brickson 2013, Brewer and Gardner 1996) and proso-
cial identities drive behaviors that promote the wel-
fare of others (Grant 2007). Prosocial identity differs
from collective identity because it is defined in terms
of helping others regardless of whether the recipient
shares the giver’s group memberships. For instance,
Ramarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
Grant and colleagues (2008) show that employee par-
ticipation in a corporate giving program affected both
prosocial identity and organizational identity (a collec-
tive identity) independently.
Two of the three types of identities we consider have
been found to influence prosocial behavior in organi-
zational contexts. A prosocial identity drives proso-
cial behavior (Grant 2007, Penner et al. 2005). For
example, identifying oneself with an altruistic role,
such as donor, increases how much, how often, and
how consistently one donates to others (Grube and
Piliavin 2000, Piliavin and Callero 1991). A collective
identity also leads to prosocial behavior. For exam-
ple, alumni identification with their university influ-
ences their donation behavior (Mael and Ashforth
1992, O’Reilly and Chatman 1986). Whether individu-
alistic identity also drives prosocial behavior remains
an open question.
Relationships Among Identities. Scholars have begun
to recognize that two or more identities may be simul-
taneously salient or coactivated for individuals, rais-
ing questions about how one’s identities are related
(Ashforth and Johnson 2001, Blader 2007, Rothbard
and Ramarajan 2009). Research suggests that simulta-
neously salient identities may be related in conflicting
(Benet-Martinez and Haritatos 2005, Greenhaus and
Beutell 1985) or enhancing ways (Dutton et al. 2010), or
they may be unrelated and operate independently of
one another (Lipponen et al. 2005).
When people experience identity conflict, they feel
caught between opposing meanings that they associate
with their different identities. Their cognition narrows,
their energy is depleted, and negative affect abounds
(Hugenberg and Bodenhausen 2004, Rothbard 2001,
Hirsh and Kang 2016), often leading to diminished
well-being and poor task performance (Brook et al.
2008, Cheng et al. 2008). When people experience
identity enhancement, they feel that the values and
meanings associated with their various identities
are complementary. Energy and positive affect are
abundant, creating engagement and inspiring growth
(Creary et al. 2015, Dutton et al. 2010, Rothbard 2001).
Consistent with research on the independence of pos-
itive and negative affect and motivation (Carver and
White 1994, Watson et al. 1988), low identity conflict is
not equivalent to high identity enhancement. Further-
more, identity conflict and enhancement can coexist.
For example, some aspects of one’s work identity can
be in conflict with some aspects of one’s family iden-
tity, while other aspects of both identities can enhance
one another (Tiedje et al. 1990).
Multiple Identity Configurations
The above research has largely examined relationships
between two identities (i.e., whether identities A and
B are related in conflicting or enhancing ways). Yet,Ramarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
examining a single relationship of conflict or enhance-
ment between a pair of identities (such as work and
family identities or organizational and professional
identities) overlooks the reality that there may be more
than two identities operating and therefore many more
relationships among those identities to consider. By
moving from two to three identities, as we do here,
more complex patterns of relationships between iden-
tities emerge. For instance, people may experience all
three identities as unrelated, two identities as enhanc-
ing and the third as unrelated, two identities as enhanc-
ing and the third conflicting with both, and so on.
Scholars have called for greater understanding of the
complexity of people’s experience and management of
more than two identities, suggesting a variety of pat-
terns that better characterize how multiple identities
may operate as a “whole,” rather than simply as indi-
vidual parts (Ashforth 2007, Pratt and Foreman 2000,
Roccas and Brewer 2002, Ramarajan 2014). We use the
term “multiple identity configurations” for patterns of
conflict and enhancement among more than two iden-
tities, as “configuration” implies “a single set of rela-
tions among many components” such that they “can
be considered a single entity” (Schachter 2004, p. 170).
Although many different multiple identity configu-
rations may exist, the dominant intuition in the liter-
ature is that a configuration characterized by mutual
enhancement among all simultaneously salient identi-
ties will be the most effective one for fostering many
organizationally relevant behaviors (Ashforth 2007,
Dutton et al. 2010, Pratt and Foreman 2000). The rea-
soning is that in this configuration, each identity facil-
itates the meanings, values, and behaviors of the oth-
ers. Yet, this intuition overlooks the specific types of
identities that may be enhancing one another. Below,
we question this intuition by considering both the
types of identities and the relationships among them
to hypothesize how prosocial, collective, and individ-
ualistic identities jointly operate to influence prosocial
behavior.
Identity Configurations and
Prosocial Behavior
To develop hypotheses about how configurations
of prosocial, collective, and individualistic identities
affect prosocial behavior, we define three theoretically
relevant patterns of relationships.
Mutual Conflict
This identity configuration is characterized by a pattern
of conflicting relationships between an individual’s
prosocial, collective, and individualistic identities. We
propose that high levels of conflict between all three
identities lead to low levels of prosocial behavior. When
people perceive their identities as conflicting, they feel
caught between opposing values, expectations, and
497
meanings (Hirsh and Kang 2016, Brook et al. 2008). The
experience of feeling torn between different aspects of
“who one is” creates a sense of psychological stress
and insecurity (Marcussen 2006), which may detract
from one’s ability to advance the other party’s wel-
fare. Identity conflict is also likely to turn one’s focus
inward toward oneself rather than outward toward oth-
ers, because one is deciding between various aspects of
who one is. Regulating and choosing among aspects of
who one is can deplete one’s cognitive and motivational
resources, leaving less energy and attention to give to
others (Baumeister et al. 1998, Marks 1977, Rothbard
2001). Thus, we have the following:
Hypothesis 1 (H1). Identity configurations characterized
by high mutual conflict between an individual’s prosocial,
collective, and individualistic identities will be associated
with low levels of prosocial behavior.
Mutual Enhancement
This identity configuration is characterized by a pat-
tern of mutual enhancement between an individual’s
prosocial, collective, and individualistic identities.
Consistent with the dominant intuition, we propose
that high levels of enhancement between all three
identities should increase prosocial behavior. Identity
enhancement can expand the cognitive and motiva-
tional resources people bring to their work, fostering
more task-focused behavior (Creary et al. 2015, Rama-
rajan 2014). This is because when a person feels that
all aspects of herself are facilitating one another, she
can focus on the task at hand rather than on who she
is (Baumeister et al. 1998, Marcussen 2006). Further,
the more people engage with the groups and relation-
ships associated with their various identities, the more
likely they are to gain meaning and energy, which they
can then devote to the task (Marks 1977, Rothbard
2001). Identity enhancement can also provide relevant
resources to apply to the task because it enables access
to the variety of identity-based knowledge, skills, and
behaviors one possesses (Caza and Wilson 2009, Cheng
et al. 2008).
Identity enhancement may also create a sense of psy-
chological security, because different aspects of who
one is are being expressed and validated simultane-
ously (Stets and Harrod 2004, Swann 1983). The greater
one’s sense of psychological security, the more one may
be able to transcend focusing on oneself (i.e., be less
self-oriented) and the more one is likely to take others
into account (i.e., be more other-oriented) (Pratt et al.
2012). This should make one more likely to engage in
prosocial behavior (Mikulincer et al. 2005). Thus we
have the following:
Hypothesis 2 (H2). Identity configurations characterized
by high mutual enhancement between an individual’s
prosocial, collective, and individualistic identities will be498
associated with higher levels of prosocial behavior than
configurations in which all three identities are mutually
conflicting.
Focused Enhancement
While the above hypothesis is both intuitively appeal-
ing and supported by research, a closer examination
of the types of identities under consideration suggests
that a focused enhancement identity configuration
may lead to even higher levels of prosocial behavior.
Enhancement in this configuration is relatively greater
between the prosocial and collective identities, with
the individualistic identity unrelated to the other two.
We explain why this configuration should exhibit the
highest levels of prosocial behavior by unpacking how
enhancement between different identity types influ-
ences prosocial behavior.
Prosocial–Collective Identity Enhancement. Prosocial
and collective identities compel a person, in one way
or another, to focus on the welfare of others (Brickson
2013, Penner et al. 2005). Hence, configurations in
which prosocial and collective identities enhance one
another are likely to foster prosocial behavior because
they motivate and mutually reinforce other-oriented
actions. For example, imagine a lawyer (collective
identity) who is also a volunteer (prosocial identity).
Enhancement between her lawyer and volunteer iden-
tities might well encourage her to seek out and take
on pro bono work: her lawyer identity motivates her to
contribute on behalf of her profession, and her volun-
teer identity motivates her to contribute her services to
clients who cannot afford to pay for legal services.
Individualistic–Prosocial and Individualistic–Collec-
tive Identity Enhancement. Adding to the mix en-
hancement between one’s individualistic identity, on
the one hand, and one’s prosocial and collective iden-
tities, on the other—i.e., full mutual enhancement—is
likely to curtail prosocial behavior relative to a con-
figuration in which prosocial and collective identities
are unrelated to the individualistic one—i.e., focused
enhancement. Individualistic identities focus a person
on his or her personal goals and achievements (Brewer
and Gardner 1996, Brickson 2013). As a result, when
an individualistic identity enhances an other-oriented
identity, the other-oriented identity may be co-opted by
the individualistic identity’s self-oriented pursuits. For
example, imagine a lawyer (collective identity) who is
a volunteer (prosocial identity) but who also defines
herself as a high-achieving legal expert (individual
identity). While enhancement between her lawyer and
volunteer identities would foster her interest in volun-
teering, she might only take on pro bono work that
would advance her own skills. Likewise, enhancement
between her lawyer and expert identities might propel
her to take on only those pro bono cases that would
Ramarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
increase her standing in the profession. Thus, con-
figurations with prosocial–collective identity enhance-
ment in which these other-oriented identities are also
enhanced by individualistic identities may result in
some prosocial behavior, but the individualistic iden-
tity, because of its self-serving orientation toward help-
ing, may function as a countervailing or limiting force
on prosocial behavior.
Research on self-serving motives for prosocial
behavior supports the argument that individualistic
identity enhancement may ultimately suppress proso-
cial behavior by activating a more self-serving orien-
tation toward helping, though this idea has not been
directly tested. This work identifies a number of ego-
istic, self-serving reasons for engaging in prosocial
behavior, including improving one’s own psychologi-
cal or material state, gaining career or knowledge bene-
fits, and making a good impression (Batson et al. 1983,
Clary et al. 1998, De Dreu and Nauta 2009).
Importantly, this research suggests that while self-
serving motives to engage in prosocial behavior can
encourage a certain amount of prosocial behavior,
they may also limit it, especially in comparison to
other-oriented motives. For instance, when people
view others in need, those motivated by a desire to
alleviate their own distress engage in more limited
helping behavior than those motivated by empathy
(Batson et al. 1983). Engaging in prosocial behavior to
feel intrinsic pleasure can also divert attention away
from the goal of prosocial activities, thus limiting
how much help one actually gives to those in need
(Andreoni 1990, Bales 1996, Grant 2008). In work set-
tings, a common self-serving motive for helping others
is impression management (Rioux and Penner 2001).
When people are motivated to help others to make a
good impression on their boss or colleagues and gain
rewards such as praise or promotions, their proso-
cial behavior is less extensive than when they are
motivated by other-oriented reasons (Grant and Mayer
2009). In sum, configurations in which prosocial and
collective identities are enhanced by an individualistic
identity (i.e., the mutual enhancement configuration)
may invoke a self-serving orientation toward helping,
ultimately resulting in lower prosocial behaviors rel-
ative to configurations in which there is prosocial-
collective identity enhancement but individualistic
identity is unrelated (i.e., the focused enhancement
configuration). Thus, we have the following:
Hypothesis 3 (H3). Identity configurations characterized
by high focused enhancement—prosocial and collective
identities are mutually enhancing but unrelated to an
individualistic identity—will be associated with higher lev-
els of prosocial behavior than configurations in which all
three identities are mutually enhancing.Ramarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
499
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
Overview of Studies
We use a mixed-method research design to test
our hypotheses because research on multiple iden-
tity configurations is still emerging (Edmondson and
McManus 2007). In Study 1, we take an exploratory
approach to understanding identity configurations,
using qualitative and quantitative data from a lon-
gitudinal field study. In Study 2, we extend the
generalizability of our results by examining identity
configurations and prosocial behavior in a team set-
ting. In Study 3, we test causal relationships using an
experimental design and also examine logically gen-
erated configurations that did not emerge in our field
studies. In Study 4, we experimentally examine self-
serving motives as an underlying mechanism for the
hypothesized effect of focused versus mutual enhance-
ment on prosocial behavior.
Study 1
Research Setting, Sample, and Procedure
Our setting involves two nonprofit organizations in
Israel that raise funds for charities through bike rides.
The first, Alyn Children’s Hospital (Alyn), involves
approximately 300 Jewish riders who collectively raise
over $2 million per year. The second, the Arava
Institute for Environmental Studies (Arava), involves
approximately 200 Jewish riders who raise close to
$700,000 per year. Riders in both events cycle roughly
60 miles per day, pay their own transportation costs
(approximately $1,000 for North Americans) and regis-
tration fees ($400), and are required to raise a minimum
amount, which is $2,500 for Alyn and $3,600 for Arava.
Event participation and fundraising represent major
investments of time and money and suggest a strong
commitment to charity, cycling, and Jewish ethnicity.
To verify the appropriateness of our setting for
testing hypotheses concerning the rich dynamics of
multiple identities, we conducted 33 semistructured
interviews with 25 informants (8 were interviewed
pre- and post-ride), prior to fielding our survey. Infor-
mants’ ages ranged from 40 to 65 years old; 44% were
female. Interviews lasted from 30 to 60 minutes and
were taped and transcribed by the authors. The inter-
view protocol covered the participants’ motivations
for joining the ride, their identities, self-perceptions in
each domain, and their training and fundraising expe-
riences. Our interview data illustrate the salience of
multiple identities to our informants and reveal rela-
tionships of conflict and enhancement between those
identities (see online appendix for illustrative exam-
ples). Quantitative data were collected using pre- and
post-ride, 20-minute, web-based surveys. In 2007, the
survey was distributed to 281 Alyn riders, and in 2014,
it was distributed to 321 Alyn riders and 160 Arava rid-
ers. A total of 162 participants completed the surveys
(response rates: Alyn 1  37%, Alyn 2  40%, Arava 
23%). The response rates are within the commonly
reported range for longitudinal organizational field
research (Roth and BeVier 1998). We combine the data
from all three rides and control for the year the survey
was taken and the beneficiary organization (Alyn or
Arava).
Measures
Independent Variables.
Identities. In 2007, participants’ identities were mea-
sured using Bergami and Bagozzi’s (2000) overlap-
ping circles scale. Participants were asked to choose
the extent of overlap between a pair of circles—
one representing themselves and the other represent-
ing the target identities: prosocial (altruist), individ-
ualistic (cyclist), and collective (Jewish). Eight pairs
of visual circles were rated on a scale from 1 (far
apart) to 8 (completely overlapping), and the means
were as follows: prosocial (altruist) identification (M 
5.7, SD  1.68); individualistic (cyclist) identification
(M  4.4, SD  1.84); and collective (Jewish) identifica-
tion (M  6.5, SD  1.7).
In 2014, participants’ identities were measured using
three items of the Luhtanen and Crocker (1992) iden-
tity subscale: “this identity is important to how I see
myself”; “this identity is an important reflection of who
I am”; and “this identity has very little to do with who I
am” (reverse coded). These items were rated on a scale
from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree), for
each identity, and the means were as follows: prosocial
(altruist) identification (M  3.66, SD  1.09); individu-
alistic (cyclist) identification (M  3.31, SD  1.28); and
collective (Jewish) identification (M  4.58, SD  0.87).
We standardized the variables before combining them
across samples. 1
Identity configurations. Our focal independent vari-
able was a measure of multiple identity configurations.
We used cluster analysis to identify the configurations
because it is a commonly used technique to reduce
complex data in a manageable way and to build
theory inductively by identifying common characteris-
tics among units (Punj and Stewart 1983, Sonenshein
et al. 2014).
To identify the clusters, we first measured iden-
tity conflict and enhancement between all three
pairs of identities: prosocial–collective, individualistic–
collective, and individualistic–prosocial. Measures
were adapted from existing multiple identity scales
(Benet-Martinez and Haritatos 2005, Brook et al. 2008).
The item stem was as follows: “Of the times when
you think of yourself as a [X] and [Y], how often do
you think . . . ” which was then followed by three con-
flict and three enhancement statements for each dyad
(counterbalanced). The three conflict items were as fol-
lows: “I struggle to maintain an [X] and [Y] way ofRamarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
500
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
Figure 1. Study 1 Configurations of Multiple Identities—Empirical Results
Key: Enhancement =
Conflict =
Strength of relationship = Width of line; Strength of identity = Size of circle
1. Mutual enhancement configuration 2. Independent configuration
5.3 3.8
Cyclist
Cyclist
4.8
5.1
2.6
1.3
2.2
5.9
5.0
6.2
3.3
Altruist
Jewish
Altruist
Jewish
3. Mutual conflict configuration 4. Focused enhancement configuration
4.5 4.3
Cyclist Cyclist
3.3
3.2
2.7
2.3
1.9
1.3
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.6
5.5
6.4
6.5
6.9
5.6
5.1
Jewish
1.4
1.4
6.4
7.0
1.1
1.8
1.7
Altruist
Jewish
Altruist
Note. Means presented are from Alyn Ride 2007 sample for illustrative purposes.
doing things”; “Being a ‘good’ [X] interferes with being
a ‘good’ [Y]”; and ”I feel a [X] way of doing things
and a [Y] way of doing things are opposed.” The three
enhancement items were “I am a better [X] because
of my [Y] identity”; “I rely on both [X] and [Y] way
of doing things”; and “I appreciate being an [X] more
because I am a [Y].” Responses were on a scale from
1 (never) to 7 (always). The reliabilities for the iden-
tity conflict and identity enhancement scales ranged
from 0.7 to 0.8 for both identity conflict and identity
enhancement across all pairs. We averaged the three
items for each pair of identities.
For robust cluster analysis, Punj and Stewart (1983)
recommend K-means clustering, and theoretically pre-
determining the number of clusters. Relying on prior
research suggesting that conflict and enhancement
are independent dimensions (Tiedje et al. 1990), 2
we specified four clusters that are based on four
possible patterns of multiple identity relationships:
low enhancement–low conflict, low enhancement–high
conflict, high enhancement–low conflict, and high
enhancement–high conflict. 3 Figure 1 displays the four
configurations resulting from the cluster analysis.
While cluster analysis is “quantitative,” it remains
an inductive technique calling for the careful interpre-
tation of clusters (Punj and Stewart 1983). Here, the
interpretation needed to take into account the meaning
of the identities along with their pattern of relation-
ships. The enhancement-conflict patterns of the four
clusters showed that one cluster most resembled a
configuration characterized by enhancement across all
three pairs, with relatively low conflict; we labeled this
mutual enhancement. Another was characterized by low
levels of both enhancement and conflict; we labeled it
independent. A third was characterized by high levels of
conflict, with some enhancement; we labeled it mutual
conflict, and the fourth cluster displayed a pattern of
focused relationships with strong enhancement of theRamarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
501
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
Table 1. Study 1 Mean Scores for Conflict and Enhancement for Identity Dyads by Configuration
Individualistic–
collective identities
Configuration
Mutual enhancement
Independent
Mutual conflict
Focused enhancement
Prosocial–
collective identities
Individualistic–
prosocial identities
Average of
3 identity dyads
Enhancement
(1) Conflict
(2) Enhancement
(3) Conflict
(4) Enhancement
(5) Conflict
(6) Enhancement
(7) Conflict
(8)
0.82
(1.06) −0.09
(0.60) 0.40
(0.79) −0.14
(0.56) 1.07
(0.88) −0.09
(0.59) 0.76
(0.57) −0.11
(0.43)
−0.54
(0.90)
0.60
(0.68)
−0.55
(0.46) −0.16
(0.91)
1.13
(1.59)
−0.34
(0.45) −0.92
(1.07)
0.14
(0.82)
0.40
(0.73) −0.37
(0.52)
0.82
(1.19)
0.01
(1.22) −0.78
(0.66)
0.11
(0.57)
−0.55
(0.54) −0.48
(0.28)
1.40
(1.49)
−0.40
(0.19) −0.75
(0.52)
0.28
(0.44)
−0.23
(0.35) −0.34
(0.44)
1.11
(0.93)
−0.24
(0.48)
Notes. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Number of observations are as follows: mutual enhancement  53; independent  39; mutual
conflict  23; focused enhancement  47; total  162. Because of the combined samples, the presented means and standard deviations are
standardized values.
collective–prosocial dyad, but relatively low enhance-
ment of the individualistic identity; we labeled this
pattern focused enhancement. We describe each config-
uration in greater detail below (see Table 1 for mean
scores for conflict and enhancement by configuration).
Illustrative examples are from our qualitative data.
1. Mutual enhancement configuration. The distin-
guishing characteristic of this configuration is that all
three identity dyads exhibit high levels of enhance-
ment. In comparison to the other configurations, we
can observe this in the average enhancement score,
which was the highest of the four configurations
(M enh  0.76) (Table 1, Column 7). The prosocial–
collective enhancement score (M pro–coll enh  0.40) in this
configuration and in the focused enhancement con-
figuration were identical (Table 1, Column 3). How-
ever, the prosocial–collective enhancement score was
the lowest of the three enhancement scores in this con-
figuration (Table 1, Columns 1 and 5). There was also a
moderate degree of identity conflict in this configura-
tion (M conf  −0.11) (Table 1, Column 8).
In the qualitative data, we saw this configuration
expressed by participants who felt that all three facets
of the ride were complementary. They found it difficult
to rank order the various aspects of the ride. Instead,
they spoke of a “perfect fit” among the components:
I’m participating because it is something that in every
aspect is close to my heart. It’s Eretz Israel [Land of
Israel], Tzedakah [charity] and Ofnayim [bike], so my
three passions. (Interview #13)
I think that there’s very little gap in the importance of
each of them. I think it’s a confluence rather than a
ranking. It’s a convergence of events that make it for
me, what makes it happen. . . . If any one of those rea-
sons weren’t there, it would diminish the focus for me.
(Interview #18)
These quotes illustrate the participants’ sense that
each identity domain was unique (e.g., my three pas-
sions, any one of those reasons) but each positively
reinforced the other (e.g., convergence) and that their
coming together formed a whole that was greater than
the sum of its parts.
2. Independent configuration. The distinguishing char-
acteristic of this cluster was the low level of both con-
flict and enhancement between identities. In essence,
the three identities did not interact with one another
positively or negatively, but rather they operated rel-
atively separate from one another. In comparison to
the other configurations, this configuration ranked
the lowest of the four in terms of both enhancement
(M enh  −0.75) and conflict (M conf  −0.34) (Table 1,
Columns 7 and 8).
In our qualitative data, we saw this configuration
expressed by participants who described their iden-
tities as fairly distinct, with the event providing an
opportunity to enact each identity separately. In con-
trast to the mutual enhancement group, who had dif-
ficulty responding to questions about how they would
rank their identities, participants within this configu-
ration could rank their identities. This configuration
was, therefore, consistent with dominance of identi-
ties as noted in the literature (Ashforth 2007, Pratt and
Foreman 2000, Roccas and Brewer 2002):
I think Israel is number one and I guess number two
really is doing the charity work in a way that’s a per-
sonal and a physical challenge for me. I think it is Israel,
charity and a physical bike ride. (Interview #21)
It [is] the biking, then Israel, and then the fundraising.
(Interview #14)
As the quotes above suggest, the most important
identity domain differed from person to person; for
some it was the collective identity, for others it was the
individualistic one. Thus, the common experience for
people with this configuration was fairly little conflict
or enhancement between their identities, suggesting
that all three identities were independent.502
3. Mutual conflict configuration. The distinguishing
characteristic of this configuration is the high level
of conflict. These participants reported high conflict
between all three identity dyads. Comparatively, the
average conflict for this configuration was the highest
of the four configurations (M conf  1.11) (Table 1, Col-
umn 8). It is notable that participants in this cluster also
experienced some enhancement (M enh  0.28) (Table 1,
Column 7).
In our interviews, people who most resembled this
configuration were individuals feeling torn between
the demands of various identities. One female rider
noted, for example, the conflict between her individ-
ualistic (cyclist) and collective (Jewish) identities and
how she was debating which to prioritize:
When I go into Jerusalem, am I going to be wearing
shorts or am I going to be wearing a skirt on top, I
don’t know. It’s kind of an issue, like here [in North
America] I ride in shorts but I don’t know about Eretz
Israel . . . . When you’re in Jerusalem, the holy city, we’re
going to be riding around, they’ll be all kinds of Yeshiva
[religious education] students there, I might put on a
skirt for the Jerusalem ride . . . I don’t think it will slow
me down . . . that’s the thing, I don’t know. I might wear
a shorter skirt, you know just a skirt that will cover my
knees, or maybe riding pants. (Interview #20)
She was also struggling to reconcile her desire to go
on the ride, which was driven by her collective identity
(“There’s something in my nature that draws me to the
Land of Israel”), with her desire to support the cause
as much as possible, which was driven by her prosocial
identity (“I donate to all kinds of organizations. I give
way more than 10 percent of my income to Tzedakah
[charity] every year”). For example, although she was
going on the ride, she was still questioning the money
spent on the trip, and whether or not it was a “waste”
compared to giving more to the organization:
I spent more money going there than I raised. If you
think about it, the plane ticket is 1,500 dollars and then
you get to Israel and you’re going to spend at least 500
dollars hanging around there and then you stay an extra
two weeks and that’s at least an extra 1,000 dollars . . . .
I wasted or spent more money than I raised. (Inter-
view #20, continued)
While people with this configuration exhibited
greater conflict relative to other clusters, they also
experienced some enhancement between identities.
For example, the above woman also described how ful-
filling one aspect of herself enhanced her fulfillment
with another:
Bicycle riding—I really enjoy it . . . . Today, I cycled
downtown . . . . See my little hole in my arm. I donate
blood platelets for cancer patients, so that’s why I have
a hole in my arm. I rode downtown and I gave blood,
takes about three hours, and then I rode for about two
Ramarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
and a half hours after I gave blood. I thought that was
very easy. I did the three hours today, nothing. (Inter-
view #20, continued)
4. Focused enhancement configuration. In this clus-
ter, participants experienced their prosocial and col-
lective identities as enhancing one another and their
individualistic identity as more separate, neither con-
flicting nor enhancing. Compared to other configu-
rations, focused enhancement ranks just above the
independent configuration in both average enhance-
ment (M enh  −0.23) and conflict (M conf  −0.24)
(Table 1, Columns 7 and 8). However, this configuration
is distinguished by high prosocial–collective enhance-
ment (M pro–coll enh  0.40) relative to the individualis-
tic identity dyads (M ind–coll enh  −0.55 and M ind–pro enh 
−0.55, Table 1, Columns 1 and 5). This is unlike the
mutual enhancement configuration, in which the same
level of prosocial–collective enhancement (M pro–coll enh 
0.40) was relatively lower than the two individualistic
identity dyads (M ind–coll enh  0.82 and M ind–pro enh  1.07,
Table 1, Columns 1 and 5).
In our qualitative data, we saw focused enhancement
among participants who spoke about the enhancement
produced through being Jewish and altruist, while
feeling low conflict and enhancement with their cyclist
identity. For example, the descriptions of one woman
about her contributions illustrate the ways in which her
prosocial identity and her collective identity mutually
enhance one another:
I don’t feel like I’m taking from Israel but I’m giving. Not
just my tourist dollars but myself . . . and there’s the issue
of . . . giving to an organization that’s a worthy organiza-
tion. I think there’s a really good feeling with that. If you
really believe in something, an organization or a charity
or a cause, and you really work hard and contribute to
it, it’s a very satisfying feeling you know. . . . I feel very
strongly that it’s a very good organization so I feel very
satisfied in working hard for it. (Interview #12)
Another participant noted the enhancement of
prosocial and collective identities and pointed to the
importance of a prosocial cause that served more than
the collective he was part of:
I feel I’m supporting a hospital plus . . . it’s a Jewish hos-
pital but I know they treat everyone . . . I know that they
treat not only Jewish children but Arab children as well.
To me, it is great. They should treat everyone who has
any type of problem. But the fact that it’s in Jerusalem,
it’s in Israel, has everything to do with the work I’m
doing for Alyn . . . [and] when I see these children who
have these terrible problems, it gives me extra energy to
try and work for them. (Interview #15)
Despite his focus on Jewish and altruist identities, he
was not ignoring his cyclist identity; indeed, in describ-
ing himself he noted, “[As a cyclist], I would say I am
sort of untamed, individualistic, and a little recklessRamarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
503
0.48
0.07
0.35
0.01
−0.00
0.09
0.20
Control Variables.
Our control variables include the following: gender
(binary) and age (continuous) of riders, survey year
(2007 or 2014), and the ride (Alyn or Arava). We also
controlled for prior experience with similar activities:
biking experience—respondents’ self-reported cycling
expertise (1  novice to 5  experienced), which we
dichotomized as 1 (expert cyclists) and 0 (novice and
intermediate cyclists); as our qualitative data sug-
gested, novice and intermediate riders were more sim-
ilar to one another (they tend to take on-road routes)
compared to experts (who took off-road routes). Altru-
ist experience was measured by asking participants
approximately how much of their annual income they
donated to charity on a scale from 1 (<1% of income)
to 5 (>10% of their income). Charity ride experience
was measured by the number of times participants
had been on their respective bike rides (never, once,
two to three times, more than three times), which we
dichotomized as 1 (three times or more on the ride)
and 0 (less than three times). Our interviews with
ride organizers suggested that people who went sev-
eral times were more likely to return than those who
went just a few times. (See Table 2 for descriptives and
correlations.)
Prosocial behavior. We operationalized prosocial be-
havior as the self-reported amount of money (in USD)
raised by each participant for their respective charity
organizations. Prior research on prosocial behavior has
used the amount raised as a meaningful criterion in
fundraising contexts (Grant and Sumanth 2009). Our
interviews with ride organizers suggested that this was
also an important outcome for the organizations. The
mean amount raised was 6,509 USD.
Dependent Variable.
even . . . I take a lot of risks that maybe people may not
take when it comes to dodging traffic and doing off
road riding and some dangerous stuff.” Yet his cycling
experience was not necessarily enhanced by his proso-
cial or collective identities. He said, “it’s great to ride
there, I love it, but as for a physical challenge . . . it will
not [be] a huge one.”
In sum, we found four configurations of multi-
ple identities in this setting: mutual enhancement, in
which all identities enhanced one another; indepen-
dent, in which all identities were largely separate from
one another with both low conflict and low enhance-
ment; mutual conflict, distinguished by strong conflict
among identities; and focused enhancement, in which
the collective–prosocial identities were enhancing and
the individualistic identity was less enhanced. We used
these four identity configurations as independent vari-
ables to test our hypotheses about the effects of config-
uration on prosocial behavior.
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS504
Results
An analysis of variance (ANOVA) of funds raised by
configuration type was significant (F 3,158  3.78, p 
0.01). In support of Hypothesis 3, participants with the
focused enhancement configuration raised the most
money (M  8,993.15, SD  10,988.27). This amount
was significantly greater than the mutual enhance-
ment configuration (M  4,846.11, SD  2,971.03), (t 
3.11, p < 0.01) and the independent configuration (M 
5,330.96, SD  3,285.91), (t  2.54, p < 0.05). However,
the focused enhancement configuration was not signif-
icantly greater than the mutual conflict configuration
(M  7,263.35, SD  5,136.04), (t  1.02, p  ns), and the
mutual enhancement, mutual conflict, and indepen-
dent configurations were also not significantly differ-
ent from one another, indicating H1 and H2 were not
supported.
Because there is over-dispersion in the dependent
variable (indicated by the variance being greater than
the mean), we further tested our hypotheses using a
negative binomial regression. The regression results
(see Table 3) indicate that the configurations have a
significant effect on prosocial behavior. The key con-
figuration variables are significant after accounting
for the control variables as well as the individual
effects of each identity (Models 1 and 2). Further-
more, in Model 3, using the mutual enhancement
configuration as the reference category we see that
only the focused enhancement configuration has a
greater effect on the amount of money raised (β 
0.44, p < 0.01). The amount of money raised by the
independent (β  −0.26, ns) and mutual conflict (β 
0.20, p  ns) configurations are not significantly differ-
ent from the mutual enhancement configuration. 4 In
sum, the focused enhancement configuration exhibited
greater prosocial behavior than the mutual enhance-
ment configuration.
Discussion. Study 1 provides several important in-
sights regarding multiple identity configurations and
prosocial behavior. First, we observed that participants’
experiences of conflicting and enhancing relationships
between the three identities could be meaningfully
captured both quantitatively and qualitatively. We
identified four configurations: independent, mutual
conflict, mutual enhancement, and focused enhance-
ment. Second, as hypothesized, we found that the
focused enhancement configuration (in which the
prosocial–collective identities were mutually enhanc-
ing but both were unrelated to the individualistic iden-
tity) resulted in higher levels of prosocial behavior than
the mutual enhancement configuration. This suggests
that the type of identity being enhanced may matter.
Self-serving motives for prosocial behavior. To fur-
ther understand why the mutual enhancement con-
figuration had lower levels of prosocial behavior
Ramarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
Table 3. Study 1 Negative Binomial Regression for
Funds Raised
Variables
Controls
Gender (female)
Age
Survey year (2014)
Ride (Alyn)
Charity ride experience (>3)
Cyclist experience (expert)
Altruist experience
Model 1
B (SE) Model 2
B (SE) Model 3
B (SE)
0.08
(0.13)
0.01 ∗∗
(0.00)
0.58 ∗∗∗
(0.14)
−0.19
(0.13) 0.06
(0.13)
0.01 ∗∗
(0.00)
0.60 ∗∗∗
(0.14)
−0.18
(0.13) −0.03
(0.12)
0.01 ∗∗
(0.00)
0.70 ∗∗∗
(0.13)
−0.02
(0.13)
−0.45 ∗∗
(0.17)
0.10
(0.14)
0.13 ∗∗
(0.05) −0.44 ∗∗
(0.16)
0.22
(0.15)
0.11 ∗
(0.05) −0.46 ∗∗
(0.15)
0.27
(0.14)
0.09
(0.04)
0.11
(0.08)
0.09
(0.08) 0.11
(0.07)
0.04
(0.06)
−0.10
(0.08) −0.20 ∗
(0.08)
Identities
Individualistic (cyclist)
Prosocial (altruist)
Collective (Jewish)
Identity configurations
Independent
Constant 7.73 ∗∗∗
(0.37) 7.71 ∗∗∗
(0.36) −0.26
(0.17)
0.20
(0.15)
0.44 ∗∗
(0.17)
7.67 ∗∗∗
(0.32)
Log likelihood −1,543.75 −1,541.80 −1,538.46
Mutual conflict
Focused enhancement
Notes. N  162. Reference category is the mutual enhancement con-
figuration. When focused enhancement configuration is the refer-
ence category, the coefficients are as follows: mutual enhancement
(β  −0.44, SE  0.17, p < 0.01); independent (β  −0.70, SE  0.21,
p < 0.01); mutual conflict (β  −0.25, SE  0.20, p  ns).
∗
p < 0.05; ∗∗ p < 0.01; ∗∗∗ p < 0.001; two-tailed tests.
relative to the focused, we returned to our qualita-
tive data. Quotes from our interviews suggest that the
mutual enhancement configuration may contain a self-
serving orientation. For instance, mutual enhancement
is described by a participant as follows:
It’s this unique chemistry . . . where the light bulb was
turned on and I said yeah, that sounds good. So it’s var-
ious components and I’m not sure what ranks highest.
(Interview #22)
This interviewee further admitted his self-serving ori-
entation. He continued,
There is something self-serving about the whole process
for me. If it wasn’t a bike ride and just money I maybe
wouldn’t be giving Alyn 2,000 dollars. But on top of thatRamarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
505
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
there’s the expense of the hotel and the adjustments for
the bike and the flight and so on. So it’s way more than
just the charitable contribution I’ve given to Alyn. So
there is something self-serving about it and while Israel
may call me, so does the bicycle. So it’s a fun thing.
(Interview #22, continued)
Similarly, the mutual enhancement rider that we
quoted previously as feeling a “confluence” and
“convergence” (interview #18) was highly personally
invested in going. He stated, “something happened last
week and I was thinking I might not be able to go and
I was very disappointed personally. If I could predict
the future, I would like to do this for as long as I can for
as often as I can.” He further described his reluctance
to raise as much money as he possibly could because it
might compromise his ability to go on the ride again:
I got an e-mail from the chairman of Alyn . . . and it says
he got so overwhelmed by Alyn and what they do and
how great it is that he decided to surpass his fundraising
minimum of 2,000 and I thought I was going to read
4,000, 5,000, and he said he raised 25,000 dollars last year
and he encouraged everyone to do that. I’m not going to
do that. I probably could if I tried but then I would never
be able to raise money again because I would basically
tap every source I had. I’m trying to do it in a way so
that if I want to do it again next year, and I will want to,
then I can go back and raise a similar amount. I decided
to raise 5,000 dollars and I’m there. (Interview #18)
For this rider, fulfilling his personal desire to ride the
following year limited the amount of money he was
willing to raise in the short term for the organization.
These examples suggest that the smaller amounts of
money raised by those with the mutual enhancement
configuration might be the result of a more self-serving
motive for participating, namely promoting one’s own
pleasure and fulfillment.
In contrast to H3, we did not find support for H1
and H2; the mutual conflict configuration was not dif-
ferent from either the focused or mutual enhancement
configurations. This may be because of the voluntary
nature of the ride. Those experiencing pure conflict
among their identities could have self-selected out of
the event, possibly limiting the level of conflict. In
fact, we chose this setting because it allowed us to
gain deeper insight into the understudied dynamics of
enhancement (Dutton et al. 2010). However, it would
be useful to examine settings in which identity conflict
is likely to be more salient.
In addition to the lack of conflict, Study 1 is also
in a unique context. The Jewish identity is a collective
identity containing religious and cultural components
(Berger and Gainer 2002). In addition, as with other
religions (Shariff and Norenzayan 2007), the religious
aspects of Jewish identity may overlap with the altru-
ist identity. Further, the individualistic identity, cyclist,
was related to a leisure activity. Therefore, examin-
ing other instantiations of the three types of identities
and prosocial behavior in a nonvoluntary, work-related
context would be useful. Accordingly, in Study 2 we
examined prosocial behavior in a team setting (Tyler
and Blader 2003).
Study 2
In Study 2, our goal was to replicate and extend the
generalizability of our findings in a team context with
a different operationalization of individualistic, collec-
tive, and prosocial identities.
Sample and Procedure
Participants were 70 executive MBA students at a Euro-
pean business school enrolled in a course on corporate
social responsibility taught in English. Respondents
were 77% male with an average age of 35 and were
working full time in their respective organizations.
Data were gathered via a questionnaire that students
were required to complete as part of their coursework.
Students had been assigned to study teams of four to
six members at the start of the semester with ongo-
ing teamwork as a required element of the curricu-
lum. Consequently, teams were meaningful collectives
in which work was accomplished and collective iden-
tities were built. We focused on identities likely to
be salient for participants in this setting: individualis-
tic (high-achieving student), collective (team member),
and prosocial (helper of their teammates unrelated to
group tasks). Survey items asked about conflict and
enhancement between each pair of identities, which
we used to construct our independent variable, iden-
tity configurations. We also asked participants to rate
the prosocial behavior of other study group mem-
bers, which served as our dependent measure. We
matched individual survey responses to their team-
mates’ ratings.
Measures
Independent Variables.
Identity configurations. Identity configurations again
served as the independent variable and were con-
structed in the following three steps:
(1) Identities. First, as in Study 1, participants rated
the extent to which they identified with each of the
three identities using the “circles overlap” measure
(Bergami and Bagozzi (2000); M ind  5.53 (SD  1.43);
M coll  5.73 (SD  1.44); M pro  5.47 (SD  1.88)).
(2) Identity conflict and enhancement. Second, similar
to the procedures of Study 1, participants were asked
to indicate the extent to which they experienced con-
flict and enhancement between identities. They rated
a single statement about conflict and a single state-
ment about enhancement for each pair of identities as
follows: “Think of your [individualistic identity as a
high achieving student] and your [collective identity506
as a member of your study group]: How frequently do
these identities conflict with one another? And how
frequently do these identities enhance one another?”
Items were rated on a scale from 1  never to 7  always
(M conf  2.61 (SD  0.91) and M enh  4.80 (SD  0.89)).
(3) Configurations. Reflecting the focus of our
hypotheses and building on the findings of Study 1,
we used the identity conflict and enhancement scores
to derive the configurations. Using the same K-means
clustering approach (Punj and Stewart 1983), we again
specified a four-cluster solution. To understand and
interpret the resulting configurations, we looked at
both the inter-cluster and the intra-cluster patterns of
conflict and enhancement. As in Study 1, we labeled
the clusters based on their closeness to our theorized
configurations:
(a) Focused enhancement (FE): This configuration
was characterized by having the highest level of
prosocial–collective identity enhancement and low
identity conflict (M conf  2.61 (0.99); M pro–coll enh  6.32
(0.48)).
(b) Mutual enhancement (ME): This configuration
was characterized by the lowest level of conflict and
equivalent levels of identity enhancement among the
identities (M conf  2.19 (0.65); M pro–coll enh  5.16 (0.37)).
(c) Mutual conflict (MC): This configuration was
characterized by the highest levels of conflict and
moderate identity enhancement (M conf  3.67 (0.67);
M pro–coll enh  4.63 (0.52)).
(d) Independent (IND): This configuration was
characterized by the lowest level of identity enhance-
ment coupled with a moderate level of conflict (M conf 
2.81 (0.77); M pro–coll enh  3.67 (0.49)).
Dependent Variable.
Prosocial behavior. We
operationalized prosocial
behavior in this team context as voluntary actions
directed toward helping other teammates’ personal
goals or needs in ways not related to the team’s tasks.
Such discretionary helping behavior has been recog-
nized as a critical form of prosocial behavior in orga-
nizations (Brief and Motowidlo 1986). We specifically
chose behaviors that were not related to the core work
of the team to distinguish our measure of prosocial
behavior from helping behavior that may be motivated
by personal benefits (such as helping the team per-
form well so one could be a high performer). Thus, this
measure is consistent with altruistically (versus egois-
tically) oriented helping (Batson et al. 1983) and some
measures of extra-role behavior in teams that empha-
size helping behavior when actors do not expect credit
for such behavior (Blader and Tyler 2009).
To measure prosocial behavior, participants were
asked to think about their experience working with [X],
who is a teammate, and answer the following question:
“Please think about how often [X] does the following
Ramarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
in his/her altruistic role as a person who helps [study]
group members on issues NOT related to the group’s
task performance.” The items, rated on a scale from
1  never to 7  always, were as follows: (1) helps team-
mates advance their personal (nongroup-related) goals
and (2) is generally helpful toward others, even when
it is not personally beneficial to him/her. For each par-
ticipant, we then used the average of team members’
ratings as the dependent variable. Cronbach’s α  0.85;
M  4.96 (SD  0.69).
Results
An ANOVA of prosocial behavior means by config-
uration type was significant (F (3, 66)  3.03, p < 0.05).
Specifically, team members rated those with a focused
enhancement identity configuration as more helpful
to teammates compared to those with other identity
configurations, thereby exhibiting the greatest proso-
cial behavior (M FE  5.26 (SD  0.72) > M ME  4.86
(SD  0.51) > M IND  4.75 (SD  0.78) > M MC  4.62
(SD  0.71)). Supporting Hypothesis 3, pairwise con-
trasts show that those with the focused enhancement
configuration exhibited significantly greater prosocial
behavior than those with mutual enhancement (t 
2.13, p < 0.05). Those with focused enhancement also
exhibited greater prosocial behavior than those with
the mutual conflict (t  2.40, p < 0.05) and the indepen-
dent (t  2.21, p < 0.05) configurations. Further, consis-
tent with Study 1, the mutual enhancement, mutual
conflict, and independent configurations were not sig-
nificantly different from one another, once again sug-
gesting that H1 and H2 were not supported. 5
Discussion. The results of Study 2 demonstrate that
those with a focused enhancement configuration
engaged in greater prosocial behavior compared to
those with a mutual enhancement configuration. Fur-
thermore, Study 2 extends the generalizability of our
findings by showing that the identity configurations of
working adults engaged in task groups function in a
similar fashion to those of the volunteers in Study 1.
We also found that mutual conflict exhibited signifi-
cantly lower prosocial behavior than focused enhance-
ment in this study, suggesting a greater role for conflict
in this nonvoluntary setting. However, one limitation
of Studies 1 and 2 is that we could only examine
identity configurations that emerged naturally in our
field settings. As a result, we do not know whether
the focused enhancement configuration was beneficial
specifically because the prosocial and collective iden-
tities were mutually enhancing and the individualis-
tic identity was unrelated, or whether any configura-
tion with two enhancing identities and the third set
apart would have similar effects. In addition, it is pos-
sible that the mutual conflict that emerged in these
field settings was more similar to configurations with
both conflict and enhancement rather than pure con-
flict. It would, therefore, be useful to experimentallyRamarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
507
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
manipulate alternative identity configurations to more
thoroughly test our hypotheses. Therefore, we designed
Study 3 to constructively replicate and extend the find-
ings from Studies 1 and 2 by experimentally inducing
work-related identity configurations.
Study 3
In Study 3, we conducted a scenario experiment that
allowed us to test causal relationships and extend gen-
eralizability by using a different context and differ-
ent operationalizations of identities. We also aimed
to compare the focused enhancement configuration to
structurally similar identity configurations that did not
emerge in Studies 1 and 2 and to examine a configura-
tion of pure mutual conflict.
Sample and Procedure
Participants were adults recruited through Amazon
Mechanical Turk (n  1,399). Participants’ average age
was 35 years (SD  11.34), 47.2% were female, and all
were located in the United States. Each participant was
paid $1 for the study.
The study design was a seven-condition scenario
experiment. The scenario presented an architecture
firm trying to balance multiple goals—profitability,
environmental sustainability, and good design—and
asked participants to imagine they were employees
in the firm. Participants were told they thought of
themselves in terms of the following: (1) their indi-
vidualistic identities as star “hotshot” employees in
the firm, which oriented them toward their personal
success; (2) their collective identities as professional
architects, which oriented them toward their profes-
sion; and (3) their prosocial identities as environmental
activists, which oriented them toward the welfare of
wider society.
Participants were also told they were members of a
voluntary “fellows” program in the firm and as part
of that program they could mentor junior employ-
ees; this was meant to be an indicator of prosocial
behavior within the organization. They were told they
could raise money as part of the sustainability efforts
of the firm and, as in Study 1, this served as an indi-
cator of philanthropic prosocial behavior. The scenario
then presented one of seven identity configurations
described below (see the online appendix) and asked
respondents to imagine the configuration represented
their own feelings regarding their identities and to
respond to the outcomes described below.
Measures
Independent Variables.
Identity configurations. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of seven conditions. Three described
the identity configurations reflected in our hypotheses:
(1) pure mutual conflict, in which all three identities are
only conflicting; (2) mutual enhancement, in which all
three identities enhance one another; and (3) focused
enhancement, in which prosocial and collective iden-
tities are enhancing and the individualistic identity is
separate.
We included four additional configurations for com-
parison purposes: (4) independent, in which all three
identities are separate (as observed in Study 1);
(5) divided, in which all three are conflicting and
enhancing. This configuration was to help us compare
pure mutual conflict as theorized with the mutual con-
flict configuration we empirically observed in Stud-
ies 1 and 2, in which there was mutual conflict and
some enhancement. We expected that the mutual con-
flict configuration would have lower prosocial behav-
ior than this divided configuration. The last two
additional configurations, (6) individualistic–prosocial
enhancement with the collective separate; and (7) in-
dividualistic–collective enhancement with the proso-
cial separate, were to help us examine whether the
beneficial effect of the focused enhancement configura-
tion in Studies 1 and 2 was simply structural (three ver-
sus two mutually enhancing identities with the third
set apart) or specifically due to the lack of enhance-
ment of the individualistic identity as we proposed. If
the latter, then the focused enhancement configuration
should exhibit greater prosocial behavior than these
two additional “partial” configurations as well.
Dependent Variable.
Prosocial intentions. Two items measured intentions
to behave prosocially:
(1) Intention to mentor young professionals. This item
asked, “How much time do you want to put into men-
toring young professionals who could be future fel-
lows?” on a scale from 1  none to 7  a lot.
(2) Effort to raise funds. This item asked, “How much
effort would you devote to raising money for this pro-
gram?” on a scale from 1  none to 7  a lot. These
measures are consistent with research suggesting that
time and effort given in a prosocial task are indicators
of prosocial behavior (Grant and Sumanth 2009).
Results
An ANOVA examining the means of prosocial
intentions by experimental condition shows that
configuration type had a significant impact on both
mentoring (F 6, 1,392  23.76, p < 0.001) and fundraising
(F 6, 1,392  10.46, p < 0.001) (see Table 4 for means).
First, consistent with Studies 1 and 2 and in support
of H3, planned comparisons show that participants in
the focused enhancement condition were significantly
more likely to spend time mentoring young employ-
ees (t  2.21, p < 0.05) and expend greater effort in
raising funds (t  2.71, p < 0.01) than those in theRamarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
508
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
Table 4. Study 3 Analysis of Variance of Prosocial Behavior
by Configurations
Configuration
Focused enhancement
(prosocial–collective enhancement;
individualistic identity separate)
Mutual enhancement
Independent
Divided (conflict and enhancement)
Individualistic–prosocial enhancement
(and collective identity separate)
Individualistic–collective enhancement
(and prosocial identity separate)
Mutual conflict (pure)
Mean (across configurations)
Intention to
mentor Effort to
raise funds
5.07 c
(1.26) 5.23 b
(1.37)
4.77 a
(1.29)
4.29 b
(1.32)
4.26 b
(1.29) 4.80 a
(1.46)
4.61 a
(1.47)
4.55 a
(1.55)
4.06 b
(1.55)
3.91 b, d
(1.47)
3.71 d
(1.53)
4.30
(1.46) 4.72 a
(1.75)
4.21 c
(1.67)
4.19 c
(1.68)
4.62
(1.60)
Notes. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Number of observa-
tions are as follows: mutual enhancement  197; independent  208;
divided  202; focused enhancement  204; individualistic–collective
enhancement  203; individualistic–prosocial enhancement  193;
mutual conflict (pure)  192; and total  1,399. Means that do not
share a superscript differ at p < 0.05.
mutual enhancement condition. The focused enhance-
ment configuration was also significantly greater than
the two additional partial enhancement configurations
(the individualistic–collective enhancement and the
individualistic–prosocial enhancement), both for men-
toring and fundraising (all p’s < 0.01). This finding
offers some support for the role of identity type in
the focused enhancement configuration. That is, all
three configurations containing individualistic iden-
tity enhancement led to lower prosocial behavior
than the focused enhancement configuration, sug-
gesting that focused enhancement may be beneficial
for prosocial behavior because of the types of iden-
tities being enhanced (prosocial–collective) and not
enhanced (individualistic). Last, consistent with H1 and
H2, the pure mutual conflict configuration resulted in
significantly lower prosocial intentions for both men-
toring and fundraising than the mutual enhancement,
focused enhancement, and divided configurations (all
p’s < 0.05).
Discussion. This study constructively replicated the
focused enhancement effect with a set of work-related
individualistic and collective identities (e.g., hotshot
and professional) and a distinct prosocial identity (e.g.,
environmental activist) in a context similar to employee
volunteering initiatives (Bartel 2001). Furthermore, in
contrast to the earlier studies, in this study we found
that the experimental manipulation of pure mutual
conflict resulted in lower levels of prosocial behavior
than focused and mutual enhancement. This may be
because the naturally emergent mutual conflict con-
figurations in Studies 1 and 2 may not have been as
purely or as strongly conflicting as the experimental
manipulation. However, this remains an open question
for future work. Last, by comparing focused enhance-
ment to mutual enhancement as well as the two other
partial configurations, this study provides some sug-
gestive evidence for the potential negative impact
of individualistic identity enhancement on prosocial
behavior. However, Study 3 still does not directly test
the proposed mechanism through which the focused
versus mutual enhancement effect operates. Specifi-
cally, Hypothesis 3 posited that the weaker proso-
cial behavior of the mutual enhancement configuration
was rooted in the enhancement of the individualistic
identity. Such enhancement may amplify self-serving
motives and thereby dampen prosocial behavior. To
test this explanation for Hypothesis 3 more thoroughly,
we undertook one final experimental study.
Study 4
In Study 4, we conducted a scenario experiment to
examine self-serving motives for prosocial behavior
as a possible mediator for the focused versus mutual
enhancement effect.
Sample and Procedure
Participants were 397 adults recruited through Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk. Their average age was 36.6 years
(SD  12.74), 57.2% were female, and all were located
in the United States. Participants were paid $2.50 for
the study.
The study design was a two-condition, between-
subjects experiment. We created an organizationally
relevant scenario involving a corporate volunteering
program similar to that used in Study 3 and mod-
eled after an existing corporate volunteering program
at IBM. The setting was a consumer goods firm called
AMI. Participants were told that they had three identi-
ties: (1) their individualistic identity as expert employ-
ees in the firm, oriented toward their personal career
success; (2) their collective identity as AMI employ-
ees, oriented toward the welfare of the organization;
and (3) their prosocial identity as volunteers, oriented
toward helping beneficiaries. Participants were pre-
sented with a configuration and asked to imagine that
it represented their own experience of their identi-
ties within AMI (see the online appendix). Participants
responded to the survey measures described below.
Measures
Independent Variables.
Identity configurations. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of two scenario conditions thatRamarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
509
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
operationalized identity configurations: (1) mutual
enhancement, in which they were told all three iden-
tities enhance one another; (2) focused enhancement,
in which they were told their collective and prosocial
identities were enhancing and the individualistic iden-
tity was not.
Dependent Variables.
Prosocial behavioral intentions. We measured proso-
cial intentions with two scales: involvement in corpo-
rate volunteering and helping behavior as a corporate
volunteer.
(1) Involvement in corporate volunteering. This was
measured as a composite of four items: participation,
time, energy, and effort devoted to the AMI program.
Using a 5-point scale (1  not likely, 5  very likely),
these items asked, “How likely are you to participate in
the voluntary service activities?” “How much time do
you expect to devote to helping beneficiaries on their
problems?” “How much energy will you give to help-
ing beneficiaries on their problems?” and “How much
effort will you give to helping beneficiaries with their
problems?” Cronbach’s α  0.90, M  4.13 (SD  0.75).
(2) Helping behavior. This was measured using six
items from Blader and Tyler’s (2009) extra-role behav-
ior scale adapted to the corporate volunteering con-
text: (1) Do things that are not expected of volunteers
to help the beneficiaries; (2) Volunteer to help orient
new volunteers; (3) Offer to help other volunteers when
they have heavy volunteer workloads; (4) Put an extra
effort into doing your volunteer work well, beyond
what is normally expected; (5) Share your knowledge
with beneficiaries or other volunteers even when you
will not receive credit; and (6) Work extra volunteer
hours even when you will not receive credit for doing
so. These items were measured on a 7-point scale
(1  never, 7  always). Cronbach’s α  0.93, M  5.36
(SD  1.14).
Mediator.
Self-serving motives for prosocial behavior. Scholars
have examined various self-serving motives for engag-
ing in prosocial behavior, ranging from pleasure to the
desire to gain career rewards (Batson et al. 1983, Clary
et al. 1998). In Study 1, the interviews revealed a self-
serving motive that was relevant in a leisure context (to
seek pleasure and personal fulfillment). In this study,
we use a self-serving motive that has been examined
in a work context: being helpful to impress one’s col-
leagues and managers at work so one can gain work-
related material and social rewards (Clary et al. 1998,
Grant and Mayer 2009, Rioux and Penner 2001). This
motive has been measured with a 12-item scale labeled
impression management motives to engage in proso-
cial behavior and has been validated and used in work
contexts (Rioux and Penner 2001). The stem was as fol-
lows: “How important is each of the following reasons
in your decision to volunteer?” Sample items included
the following: “to avoid looking bad in front of oth-
ers; to look better than my co-workers; because I want
a raise.” Items were measured on a 6-point scale (6 
extremely important, 1  not at all important). Cron-
bach’s α  0.95, M  2.76 (SD  1.37).
Results
An overall ANOVA examining the means of prosocial
intention by configuration type showed that those in
the focused enhancement condition reported greater
involvement (M FE  4.23 (SD  0.69) > M ME  4.03
(SD  0.79), F 1,395  7.12, p < 0.01) and helping behav-
ior (M FE  5.50 (SD  1.13) > M ME  5.20 (SD  1.14),
F 1,395  6.83, p < 0.01) than the mutual enhancement
condition. An ANOVA examining the means of self-
serving orientation by configuration type was also sig-
nificant (M FE  2.48 (SD  1.29) < M ME  3.05 (SD 
1.40), F 1,395  17.70, p < 0.001). A mediation analysis
using Hayes’ (2013) PROCESS macro with 1,000 boot-
strap samples and a 95% CI shows that consistent
with our expectations, self-serving motives mediated
this effect. Specifically, the indirect effect estimate for
involvement was B  −0.07 (SE  0.03), the 95% CI
did not include zero (LL  −0.13 to UL  −0.03), and
the indirect effect estimate for helping was B  −0.14
(SE  0.04), and the 95% CI did not include zero (LL 
−0.24 to UL  −0.07). These results support the argu-
ment that self-serving orientation mediates the nega-
tive effect of the mutual enhancement configuration on
prosocial behavior. 6
Discussion. Consistent with the earlier studies and
supporting Hypothesis 3, Study 4 shows that the
focused enhancement configuration exhibited greater
prosocial intention than the mutual enhancement con-
figuration. Study 4 also replicates and extends the find-
ings of the earlier studies by demonstrating that, as
theorized, self-serving motives exhibited by those with
the mutual enhancement configuration are an under-
lying mechanism driving their lower level of prosocial
behavior relative to the focused enhancement configu-
ration. Whether this mechanism also differentiates the
focused enhancement configuration from other config-
urations remains an avenue for future exploration.
General Discussion
Prosocial behavior, which protects, promotes, and con-
tributes to the welfare of others, is crucial for the
healthy functioning of organizations and societies.
This paper set out to understand how configurations
of prosocial, collective, and individualistic identities
combine to influence prosocial behavior. Intuitively, a
configuration of mutual enhancement—in which all
three identities are enhancing—should lead to the
highest levels of prosocial behavior; however, across510
four studies, utilizing multiple methods and multiple
contexts, we found that a focused enhancement con-
figuration, characterized by high prosocial–collective
identity enhancement and limited individualistic iden-
tity enhancement, resulted in the highest levels of
prosocial behavior.
Our paper contributes to the literatures on both
prosocial behavior and multiple identities in organi-
zations. First, by taking a configurational approach
to identity relationships, we have introduced a new
way to study multiple identities that extends beyond
existing single- and dual-identity approaches. In addi-
tion, the results of Study 1 suggest that identity
configurations better explain prosocial behavior than
single, salient identities. Interestingly, other studies
have also found that single identifications were not
significantly related to outcomes while identity rela-
tionships were (Cheng et al. 2008). Reading our results
alongside the existing literature suggests that when
several identities are simultaneously salient, a configu-
rational approach may be more informative than exam-
ining identities alone.
Second, by attending to both identity types and
relationships, we questioned the dominant intuition
regarding the mutual enhancement configuration and
instead demonstrated that a focused enhancement
configuration could lead to higher levels of proso-
cial behavior. Our research also articulates and pro-
vides support for a mechanism through which focused
enhancement maximizes prosocial behavior. Specifi-
cally, we suggest that individualistic identity enhance-
ment may be counterproductive, because it ampli-
fies a self-serving orientation when helping others
(Batson et al. 1983, Grant and Mayer 2009, Rioux and
Penner 2001).
Third, by focusing on prosocial behavior—an other-
oriented outcome (Creary et al. 2015)—this paper
moves research on multiple identities beyond per-
sonally oriented outcomes such as well-being, work
engagement, and creativity (Brook et al. 2008, Cheng
et al. 2008, Rothbard 2001, Thoits 1983). This opens up
new opportunities for studying the links between mul-
tiple identities and prosocial behavior.
The results are bolstered by the multimethod
approach we used to unpack the complexity of mul-
tiple identity configurations. Across the four studies,
we used qualitative, quantitative, and experimental
designs, and we consistently found that the focused
enhancement configuration leads to higher levels of
prosocial behavior than the mutual enhancement con-
figuration. Furthermore, the strengths of some stud-
ies offset the limitations of others (McGrath 1981).
For example, although Study 1 examines a voluntary
setting, the subsequent studies examine work-related
contexts. The concerns with utilizing “minimal” iden-
tity configurations, hypothetical scenarios, and hypo-
thetical behavioral intentions in Studies 3 and 4 are
Ramarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
somewhat mitigated by the field settings and situ-
ated identities of participants in Studies 1 and 2. Like-
wise, the experimental approaches of Studies 3 and 4
help address concerns with causality and configura-
tions that did not emerge in the field. Moreover, we
used multiple measures of prosocial behavior (our
dependent variable), ranging from actual donations, to
prosocial behavior rated by others, to prosocial inten-
tions measured by validated scales. Taken together, the
four studies illustrate that our key findings hold across
various operationalizations of identity configurations
and prosocial behavior.
Future research on both multiple identities and
prosocial behavior can build on this paper’s findings
in several ways. First, a key boundary condition of
our studies is that we examine the effects of identity
configurations on prosocial behavior. Extending these
findings to other outcomes is an important direction
for future work. Specifically, we do not imply that the
focused enhancement configuration will be more effec-
tive than the mutual enhancement configuration for all
tasks and outcomes. Our pattern of findings may not
extend, for example, to outcomes such as satisfaction or
career success. Even within the literature on prosocial
behavior there is a common distinction between altru-
istic and egoistic prosociality (Batson et al. 1983, Brief
and Motowidlo 1986). The effects of focused enhance-
ment may be most applicable to prosocial behavior
that is largely altruistic, while the mutual enhancement
configuration may be no different, or better, for proso-
cial behavior that jointly benefits oneself and others.
Relatedly, perhaps the mutual enhancement configura-
tion optimizes performance across multiple outcomes,
while the focused enhancement configuration is most
effective for prosocial behavior alone.
Second, future work should examine the relation-
ship between collective and prosocial identities in
greater detail. In our studies, we did not manipu-
late whether givers and receivers shared a collective
identity. Our findings suggest that the benefits of
focused enhancement are present for helping mem-
bers of one’s ingroup (Study 2) as well as help-
ing nongroup members (Studies 1, 3, 4). However,
ingroup/outgroup dynamics may moderate these
effects. Focused enhancement may make it easier to
help outgroup members, while mutual enhancement
may be more effective for helping ingroup mem-
bers because individualistic identity enhancement may
backfire less when one can gain status within the group
by helping group members. A related boundary condi-
tion may be that the benefits of focused enhancement
are most likely to occur in contexts where the collective
identity and the prosocial identity somewhat overlap;
for example, among organizations with social respon-
sibility programs.Ramarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
511
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
Third, future work should also examine the general-
izability of these results beyond the identities studied
in this paper. For example, future work could explore
the valence of these identities (e.g., a has-been instead
of a hot-shot). It is likely that people will still focus on
fulfilling their personal needs even when the individ-
ualistic identity is negatively valenced because people
maintain negative self-views (Swann 1983). However,
future work needs to explore whether the valence of
the identities alters the impact of individualistic iden-
tity enhancement. Future work could also examine dif-
ferent types of identities (e.g., relational identities in
the work domain, such as a boss or subordinate).
Contemporary trends suggest that organizations
will increasingly try to integrate prosocial behavior
with other goals (Battilana and Lee 2014, Grant 2012).
Organizational members are also increasingly attempt-
ing to blend prosociality with personal and profes-
sional aspects of their lives (Bartel 2001, Grant et al.
2008). This paper proposes a configurational approach
to investigate how people experience and manage the
complexity of their multiple identities in the face of
such trends. We suggest that managing our prosocial
identities along with other personal- and work-related
identities has important consequences for prosocial
behavior in organizational settings: mutual enhance-
ment may backfire, while focused enhancement may
provide important benefits.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to the organizers and participants
of the Alyn and Arava Rides, who graciously supported the
research. The authors are grateful to the Division for Faculty
Research and Development at Harvard Business School, the
Ted Rogers School of Management, and the Paul Baerwald
School of Social Work and Social Welfare, for enabling this
research. The authors thank their colleagues for feedback
on earlier versions of this paper: Michel Anteby, Blake Ash-
forth, Sigal Barsade, Julie Battilana, Steven Blader, Jennifer
Berdahl, Stephanie Creary, Tracy Dumas, Robin Ely, Mary
Ann Glynn, Francesca Gino, Adam Grant, Spencer Harrison,
Jochem Menges, Celia Moore, Tsedal Neeley, Otilia Obo-
daru, Jennifer Petriglieri, Jeff Polzer, Michael Pratt, Erin Reid,
Nancy Rothbard, and Steffanie Wilk. The authors are grateful
to seminar participants at Boston College, INSEAD, London
School of Economics, London Business School, University of
British Columbia, University of Toronto, and the Wharton
Junior Faculty OB Conference for their feedback. The authors
thank Breeshna Javed, Christy Ley, Ayelet Oreg, and Jean
Sohn for their assistance with data collection. The authors
are grateful to Emily LeRoux-Rutledge and Sharon Benheim
for their editing assistance.
Endnotes
1
Given the load on participants, we did not use both measures in tan-
dem in the field study. However, in a separate survey study (n  500)
on Mturk the correlations between the visual scale and the three-item
measure for the same identity ranged between 0.7 to 0.8, providing
some evidence that the two measures were valid measures of the
same construct. Therefore, we standardized the measures.
2
The correlation between conflict and enhancement for a given pair
of identities was between 0.1 and 0.25, and the correlation between
identity conflict and enhancement averaged across all the pairs was
0.17, p < 0.05. This also supported the idea that conflict and enhance-
ment are not opposites of one another.
3
We also examined the four-cluster solution against two-cluster and
three-cluster solutions based on theoretical grounds. The four-cluster
solution was the most efficient clustering solution, providing max-
imum variation between clusters while still exhibiting coherence
within cluster.
4
We conducted several robustness checks. First, we examined the
results for a subsample of participants that raised over $2,500 (the
minimum for Alyn) (n  133) because we did not have a measure of
income as a control variable. That is, participants who could afford
to do so may have simply paid the minimum. The results are con-
sistent with those presented here: the focused enhancement config-
uration raises significantly more than the mutual enhancement and
independent; in addition, it is also significantly higher than mutual
conflict. Second, we also had two outliers in the data, and we tested
our results without those two observations to ensure they were not
being driven by the outliers. The results are consistent with those
reported here. Third, we also examined the results separately for the
two Alyn samples (2007, n  60 and 2014, n  65; note the Arava ride
sample was too small to test the hypothesis (n  37)). The results
were also consistent with those reported here. Last, OLS results are
also consistent with those presented here. All additional results are
available from the first author.
5
Because group members rated one another, we calculated the intr-
aclass correlation coefficient, ICC(1), which measures how much
variance in prosocial behavior is accounted for by nesting measures
within a given unit (in this case, the group). ICC(1)s that are over 0.25
are considered a “large” effect (LeBreton and Senter 2008), mean-
ing that one-quarter or more of the variability in the outcome is
due to systematic within-group differences. The ICC(1) was 0.08. In
addition, the smaller the number of observations within a group,
the lower the impact of a small ICC(1) (Kreft and de Leeuw 1998).
Here we had four to six observations per group. Thus, we expect the
impact of the within-group variability to be low. However, because
there was still some variation explained by the group, we also exam-
ined a multilevel model accounting for the group. Because multilevel
modeling typically requires much larger sample sizes at both levels
(here we had 13 groups and 70 people; Maas and Hox 2005) and
because there were no differences between the mutual enhancement,
independent, and mutual conflict configurations, we examined only
the focused enhancement configuration compared to the others. We
found that our results are robust (B focused  0.40, p  0.014).
6
We conducted a replication of Study 4 to examine an additional
measure of self-serving orientation toward helping. We used the
same design, manipulation, and population from which to sample
(n  418 Mturk workers). We included both the measure of impres-
sion management motives (Rioux and Penner 2001) used in Study 4
and a four-item self-oriented helping scale (Roth 2008). The correla-
tion between the two scales was 0.57. A mediation analysis as above
shows that both measures of self-serving orientation toward help-
ing were significant. Specifically, the indirect effect estimate of the
impression management motives scale (Rioux and Penner 2001) was
B  −0.06 (SE  0.02), and the 95% CI did not include zero (LL  −0.11
to UL  −0.03), and the indirect effect estimate for the self-oriented
helping scale (Roth 2008) was B  −0.06 (0.02), and the 95% CI did
not include zero (LL  −0.11 to UL  −0.02). This suggests that our
results are robust to these two different operationalizations of self-
serving orientation toward helping in this context.512
References
Andreoni J (1990) Impure altruism and donations to public goods:
A theory of warm-glow giving. Econom. J. 100(401):464–477.
Ashforth BE (2007) Identity: The elastic concept. Bartel CA, Blader
S, Wrzesniewski A, eds. Identity and the Modern Organization
(Lawrence-Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ), 85–96.
Ashforth BE, Johnson SA (2001) Which hat to wear? The relative
salience of multiple identities in organizational contexts. Hogg
MA, Terry DJ, eds. Social Identity Processes in Organizational Con-
texts (Psychology Press, Philadelphia), 31–48.
Bales K (1996) Measuring the propensity to volunteer. Soc. Policy
Admin. 30(3):206–226.
Bartel C (2001) Social comparisons in boundary-spanning work:
Effects of community outreach on members’ organizational
identity and identification. Admin. Sci. Quart. 46(3):379–313.
Bartel C, Blader S, Wrzesniewski A, eds. (2007) Identity and the Mod-
ern Organization (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Publishers,
Mahwah, NJ).
Batson CD, O’Quin K, Fultz J, Vanderplas M, Isen AM (1983) Influ-
ence of self-reported distress and empathy on egoistic ver-
sus altruistic motivation to help. J. Personality Soc. Psych. 45(3):
706–718.
Battilana J, Lee M (2014) Advancing research on hybrid organizing—
Insights from the study of social enterprises. Acad. Management
Ann. 8(1):397–441.
Baumeister RF, Bratslavsky E, Muraven M, Tice DM (1998) Ego deple-
tion: Is the active self a limited resource? J. Personality Soc. Psych.
74(5):1252–1265.
Benet-Martinez V, Haritatos J (2005) Bicultural identity integration
(BII): Components and psychosocial antecedents. J. Personality
73(4):1015–1050.
Bergami M, Bagozzi RP (2000) Self-categorization, affective commit-
ment and group self-esteem as distinct aspects of social identity
in the organization. British J. Soc. Psych. 39(4):555–577.
Berger IE, Gainer B (2002) Jewish identity, social capital and giving.
Adv. Consumer Res. 29(1):408–413.
Blader SL (2007) Let’s not forget the“ me” in “team”: Investigating
the interface of individual and collective identity. Bartel CA,
Blader S, Wrzesniewski A, eds. Identity and the Modern Organiza-
tion (Lawrence-Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ), 61–84.
Blader SL, Tyler TR (2009) Testing and extending the group engage-
ment model: Linkages between social identity, procedural jus-
tice, economic outcomes and extrarole behavior. J. Appl. Psych.
94(2):445–464.
Brewer MB, Gardner W (1996) Who is this “we”? Levels of collec-
tive identity and self representations. J. Personality Soc. Psych.
71(1):83–93.
Brickson SL (2013) Athletes, best friends, and social activists: An
integrative model accounting for the role of identity in organi-
zational identification. Organ. Sci. 24(1):226–245.
Brief AP, Motowidlo SJ (1986) Prosocial organizational behaviors.
Acad. Management Rev. 11(4):710–725.
Brook AT, Garcia J, Fleming MA (2008) The effects of multiple iden-
tities on psychological well-being. Personality Soc. Psych. Bull.
34(12):1588–1600.
Burke PJ, Stets J (2009) Identity Theory (Oxford University Press, New
York).
Carver CS, White TL (1994) Behavioral inhibition, behavioral activi-
ation, and affective responses to impending reward and punish-
ment: The BIS/BAS scales. J. Personality Soc. Psych. 67(2):319–333.
Caza B, Wilson M (2009) Me, Myself, and I: The Benefits of Work Identity
Complexity (Psychology Press, London).
Cheng C, Sanchez-Burks J, Lee F (2008) Connecting the dots
within: Creative performance and identity integration. Psych.
Sci. 19(11):1178–1184.
Clary EG, Snyder M, Ridge RD, Copeland J, Stukas AA, Haugen J,
Miene P (1998) Understanding and assessing the motivations
of volunteers: A functional approach. J. Personality Soc. Psych.
74(6):1516–1530.
Ramarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
Creary SJ, Caza BB, Roberts LM (2015) Out of the box? How man-
aging a subordinate’s multiple identities affects the quality
of a manager-subordinate relationship. Acad. Management Rev.
40(4):538–562.
De Dreu CK, Nauta A (2009) Self-interest and other-orientation
in organizational behavior: Implications for job performance,
prosocial behavior, and personal initiative. J. Appl. Psych.
94(4):913–926.
Dutton JE, Roberts LM, Bednar JS (2010) Pathways for positive iden-
tity construction at work: Four types of positive identity and
the building of social resources. Acad. Management Rev. 35(2):
265–293.
Edmondson A, McManus SE (2007) Methodological fit in manage-
ment field research. Acad. Management Rev. 32(4):1155–1179.
Grant AM (2007) Relational job design and the motivation to make a
prosocial difference. Acad. Management Rev. 32(2):393–417.
Grant AM (2008) Does intrinsic motivation fuel the prosocial fire?
Motivational synergy in predicting persistence, performance,
and productivity. J. Appl. Psych. 93(1):48–58.
Grant AM (2012) Giving time, time after time: Work design and sus-
tained employee participation in corporate volunteering. Acad.
Management Rev. 37(4):589–615.
Grant AM, Dutton JE (2012) Beneficiary or benefactor: Are people
more prosocial when they reflect on receiving or giving? Psych.
Sci. 23(9):1033–1039.
Grant AM, Mayer DM (2009) Good soldiers and good actors: Proso-
cial and impression management motives as interactive pre-
dictors of affiliative citizenship behaviors. J. Appl. Psych. 94(4):
900–912.
Grant AM, Sumanth JJ (2009) Mission possible? The performance
of prosocially motivated employees depends on manager trust-
worthiness. J. Appl. Psych. 94(4):927–944.
Grant AM, Dutton JE, Rosso BD (2008) Giving commitment:
Employee support programs and the prosocial sensemaking
process. Acad. Management J. 51(5):898–918.
Greenhaus JH, Beutell NJ (1985) Sources of conflict between work
and family roles. Acad. Management Rev. 10(1):76–88.
Grube JA, Piliavin JA (2000) Role identity, organizational experi-
ences, and volunteer performance. Personality Soc. Psych. Bull.
26(9):1108–1119.
Hayes AF (2013) Introduction to Mediation, Moderation, and Conditional
Process Analysis (Guilford Press, New York).
Hirsh JB, Kang SK (2016) Mechanisms of identity conflict: Uncer-
tainty, anxiety, and the behavioral inhibition system. Pers. Soc.
Psych. Rev. 20(3):223–244.
Hugenberg K, Bodenhausen GV (2004) Category membership mod-
erates the inhibition of social identities. J. Experiment. Soc. Psych.
40(2):233–238.
James W (1890) The Principles of Psychology (Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA). [Reprint 1983.]
Kreft I, de Leeuw J (1998) Introducing Multilevel Modeling (Sage Pub-
lications, Thousand Oaks, CA).
LeBreton JM, Senter JL (2008) Answers to 20 questions about inter-
rater reliability and interrater agreement. Organ. Res. Methods
11(4):815–852.
Lipponen J, Helkama K, Olkkonen ME, Juslin M (2005) Predict-
ing the different profiles of organizational identification: A case
of shipyard subcontractors. J. Occupational Organ. Psych. 78(1):
97–112.
Luhtanen R, Crocker J (1992) A collective self-esteem scale: Self-
evaluation of one’s social identity. Personality Soc. Psych. Bull.
18(3):302–318.
Maas CJM, Hox JJ (2005) Sufficient sample sizes for multilevel mod-
eling. Methodology 1(3):86–92.
Mael F, Ashforth BE (1992) Alumni and their alma mater: A partial
test of the reformulated model of organizational identification.
J. Organ. Behav. 13(2):103–123.
Marcussen K (2006) Identities, self-esteem, and psychological dis-
tress: An application of identity-discrepancy theory. Soc. Per-
spect. 49(1):1–24.Ramarajan, Berger, and Greenspan: Multiple Identity Configurations
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 495–513, © 2017 INFORMS
Marks SR (1977) Multiple roles and role strain: Some notes on human
energy, time and commitment. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 42(6):921–936.
McGrath JE (1981) Dilemmatics: The study of research choices and
dilemmas. Amer. Behav. Scientist 25(2):179–210.
Mikulincer M, Shaver PR, Gillath O, Nitzberg RA (2005) Attach-
ment, caregiving, and altruism: Boosting attachment security
increases compassion and helping. J. Personality Soc. Psych.
89(5):817–839.
O’Reilly CA, Chatman J (1986) Organizational commitment and
psychological attachment: The effects of compliance, identifica-
tion, and internalization on prosocial behavior. J. Appl. Psych.
71(3):492–499.
Penner LA, Dovidio JF, Piliavin JA, Schroeder DA (2005) Proso-
cial behavior: Multilevel perspectives. Annual Rev. Psych.
56(February):365–392.
Piliavin JA, Callero PL (1991) Giving Blood: The Development of an
Altruistic Identity (Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore).
Pratt MG, Foreman PO (2000) Classifying managerial responses
to multiple organizational identities. Acad. Management Rev.
25(1):18–42.
Pratt MG, Fiol CM, O’Connor EJ, Panico P (2012) Promoting positive
change in physician–administrator relationships: The impor-
tance of identity security in managing intractable identity con-
flicts. Golden-Biddle K, Dutton JE, eds. Using a Positive Lens to
Explore Social Change and Organizations: Building a Theoretical and
Research Foundation (Routledge, New York), 267–288.
Punj G, Stewart DW (1983) Cluster analysis in marketing research:
Review and suggestions for application. J. Marketing Res.
20(2):134–148.
Ramarajan L (2014) Past, present and future research on multiple
identities: Toward an intrapersonal network approach. Acad.
Management Ann. 8(1):589–659.
Rioux SM, Penner LA (2001) The causes of organizational citizen-
ship behavior: A motivational analysis. J. Appl. Psych. 86(6):
1306–1314.
Roccas S, Brewer MB (2002) Social identity complexity. Personality
Soc. Psych. Rev. 6(2):88–106.
Roth G (2008) Perceived parental conditional regard and auton-
omy support as predictors of young adults’ self- versus other-
oriented prosocial tendencies. J. Personality 76(3):513–534.
Roth PL, BeVier CA (1998) Response rates in HRM/OB sur-
vey research: Norms and correlates, 1990–1994. J. Management
24(1):97–117.
Rothbard NP (2001) Enriching or depleting? The dynamics of engag-
ment in work and family roles. Admin. Sci. Quart. 46(4):655–684.
Rothbard NP, Ramarajan L (2009) Checking your identities at the
door? Positive relationships between nonwork and work identi-
ties. Roberts LM, Dutton JE, eds. Exploring Positive Identities and
Organizations (Psychology Press, New York), 125–144.
Schachter EP (2004) Identity configurations: A new perspective
on identity formation in contemporary society. J. Personality
72(1):167–200.
513
Schaubroeck J, Ganster DC (1991) Beyond the call of duty: A field
study of extra-role behavior in voluntary organizations. Human
Relations 44(6):569–582.
Shariff AF, Norenzayan A (2007) God is watching you priming God
concepts increases prosocial behavior in an anonymous eco-
nomic game. Psych. Sci. 18(9):803–809.
Sonenshein S, DeCelles K, Dutton J (2014) It’s not easy being green:
Self-evaluations and their role in explaining support of environ-
mental issues. Acad. Management J. 57(1):7–37.
Stets JE, Harrod MM (2004) Verification across multiple identities:
The role of status. Soc. Psych. Quart. 67(2):155–171.
Swann WB (1983) Self-verification: Bringing social reality into har-
mony with the self. Suls J, Greenwald AG, eds. Social Psycholog-
ical Perspectives on the Self, Vol. 2 (Psychology Press, New York),
33–66.
Thoits PA (1983) Multiple identities and psychological well-being:
A reformulation and test of the social isolation hypothesis. Amer.
Sociol. Rev. 48(2):174–187.
Tiedje LB, Wortman CB, Downey G, Emmons C, Biernat M, Lang E
(1990) Women with multiple roles: Role-enhancement percep-
tions, satisfaction, and mental-health. J. Marriage Family 52(1):
63–72.
Tyler TR, Blader SL (2003) The group engagement model: Procedural
justice, social identity, and cooperative behavior. Personality Soc.
Psych. Rev. 7(4):349–361.
Watson D, Clark LA, Tellegen A (1988) Development and validation
of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS
scales. J. Personality Soc. Psych. 54(6):1063–1070.
Lakshmi Ramarajan is assistant professor of organi-
zational behavior at Harvard Business School, Harvard
University. She received her Ph.D. from the Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania. Her research examines the man-
agement and consequences of individuals’ multiple identi-
ties in organizations.
Ida E. Berger is professor of marketing and a member
of the graduate faculty at the Ted Rogers School of Busi-
ness Management at Ryerson University. She received her
Ph.D. from the University of Toronto. Her research interests
are social identity, ethnic diversity, social integration, social
alliances, socially responsible consumer behavior, and phi-
lanthropy.
Itay Greenspan is lecturer of nonprofit management and
leadership at the Paul Baerwald School of Social Work and
Social Welfare, Hebrew University of Jerusalem. He received
his Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania. His research
interests include nonprofit organizations and civil society,
prosocial and proenvironmental behavior, identity forma-
tion, and environmental civic participation.