Motive, Opportunity, Choice, and Corporate Illegality
Author(s): Marie A. McKendall, John A. Wagner and III
Source: Organization Science, Vol. 8, No. 6 (Nov. - Dec., 1997), pp. 624-647
Published by: INFORMS
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2635160
Accessed: 25-01-2018 04:20 UTC
REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2635160?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms
INFORMS is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Organization
Science
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMotive, Opportunity, Choice,
and Corporate Illegality
Marie A. McKendall * John A. Wagner, III
Grand Valley State University, 236 Lake Huron Hall, Allendale, Michigan 49401
Michigan State University, Department of Management, East Lansing, Michigan 48824
W hat pathological conditions breed illegal corporate actions? This research probes the linkages
between individual-level, organization-level, and industry-level antecedents of violations of U.S.
environmental laws. The authors conclude that such violations spring from an intricate pattern of motive,
opportunity, and choice.
Alan Meyer
phenomena.... We [organization theorists] should be directing
Abstract
Research on corporate illegality spans several distinct literatures
and defies ready integration. This article helps to overcome
those problems. Analysis of data from 80 U.S. industrial or-
ganizations indicates that lower industry profitability is asso-
our efforts to understanding massive dysfunctions at the macro
level, not just explaining order and congruence.... We need to
develop a theory of error, pathology, and disequilibrium in or-
ganization.
Pondy and Mitroff 1979, pp. 11-17
ciated with higher frequencies of detected serious violations of
federal environmental laws. Organizational profitability, indus- Of the different kinds of macro dysfunctions of potential
try concentration, organization size, structural complexity, or- interest to organization theorists, one that appears com-
mon in incidence and consequential in effect is corporate
illegality. Corporate illegality consists of actions (of
omission or commission) by any individual or group
within a business organization that violate an administra-
tive, civil, or criminal law, and for which the organization
is the primary intended beneficiary (Baucus 1994,
Schrager and Short 1978, Shover 1978). Although no one
knows the full extent of corporate illegality, the available
evidence suggests that a significant number of large
manufacturing firms routinely violate federal laws. Some
of this evidence comes from classic research by Clinard
et al. (1979), who studied enforcement actions by 24 fed-
eral agencies against the 582 largest publicly owned cor-
porations actions during 1975 and 1976. The findings in-
dicated that manufacturing firms incurred an average of
4.8 enforcement actions during the observation period,
and that 40% engaged in repeated violations. Similarly,
a study of Fortune 500 companies showed that 20% of
the sampled firms had been convicted or penalized for
serious violations of federal law between 1970 and 1980
(Thornburg 1991). Additional evidence continues to ap-
pear in the many reports of corporate wrongdoing pub-
lished in the business and popular press (e.g., Byrne 1995,
Harr 1995, Nocera 1995).
ganizational decentralization, and ethical climate join this vari-
able in statistical interactions also associated with detected
instances of serious environmental violations. However, none
of those variables are found to be associated with the incidence
of detected nonserious violations. These results provide quali-
fied support for a model of corporate illegality in which illegal
behaviors are attributable to the interactive effects of motive,
opportunity, and choice. They suggest that illegal corporate ac-
tivities resist simple explanation, and that future research on
corporate illegality should concentrate on further development
of multivariable models.
(Corporate Illegality; Organizational Dysfunction; En-
vironmental Laws; TOBIT Regression Analysis; Multi-
variable Model)
One of the striking differences between organizational behavior
and organization theory is that organizational behavior (the mi-
cro branch of organization studies) defines much of its research
effort in terms of dysfunctions of the system.... But organi-
zation theory as a field is currently so preoccupied with explain-
ing order that it has not yet discovered these most interesting
1047-7039/97/0806/06241$05.00
624 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/NOl. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
Copyright ? 1997, Institute for Operations Research
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
and the Management SciencesMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
Compelling evidence also has been reported on the
costs of corporate illegality. Such costs include financial
costs; deaths, disabilities, illnesses, and injuries to em-
ployees and consumers; the short- and long-term effects
of pollution on health and the environment; and the de-
pletion of natural resources (e.g., Baucus 1994, Clinard
et al. 1979, Finney and Lesieur 1982, Geis 1985, Schrager
and Short 1978). They also include less direct but perhaps
more consequential social costs, such as the possible de-
cline of societal morals precipitated by illegal corporate
actions (Szwajkowski 1986). In response to increasing
public awareness of these direct and indirect costs, in
1991 the U.S. Congress enacted the Congressional Sen-
tencing Guidelines which established mandatory fines of
up to $290 million for corporations convicted of viola-
tions of federal law (Kaplan 1991). Clearly, the U.S. gov-
ernment and the society it represents attach great impor-
tance to curbing the occurrence and costs of illegal
corporate activities.
Despite the need to understand and control corporate
illegality, relevant research is fragmented. It spans a va-
riety of fields in law and in the social and behavioral
sciences and is relatively sparse. Clinard et al. (1979)
noted that the few published quantitative studies were
very narrow in scope and pertained almost exclusively to
antitrust violations. Szwajkowski (1986) later echoed this
observation, lamenting the near absence of systematic
empirical research. Subsequently, several empirical stud-
ies have been published (e.g., Baucus and Near 1991,
Cochran and Nigh 1987, Dalton and Kesner 1988, Hill et
al. 1992) and a few conceptual analyses have appeared
(e.g., Baucus 1994, Finney and Lesieur 1982). Nonethe-
A Theory of Corporate Illegality
What prompts individuals and groups to perpetrate illegal
acts in the name of and for the benefit of corporate or-
ganizations? Several researchers (Baucus 1994, Coleman
1987, Finney and Lesieur 1982, Szwajkowski 1986,
Vaughn 1982) have offered theories to explain corporate
illegality. Although these theories are not in complete
concurrence, the major hypothesized constructs and pro-
cess can be summarized as follows. Corporations operate
in an environment of goal directedness, competition, and
performance pressures. Factors external and internal to
each organization combine to create a tension or motive
to engage in illegal activities as a way of achieving or-
ganizational objectives and ensuring organizational sur-
vival. In the presence of motivation, additional factors,
again both internal and external, operate to create the op-
portunity to engage in illegal activities. Whether motive
and opportunity will actually influence intentional illegal
behavior depends on choice, which is shaped by the pres-
ence of effective controls that function to prevent cor-
porate illegality.
As suggested by this synopsis, most conceptual models
of corporate illegality are complex and interactive. How-
ever, most empirical research has tested only for simple,
zero-order effects. Although we do not totally dismiss the
predictive efficacy of main-effect relationships-in fact,
we advance a collection of zero-order hypotheses on the
way to proposing hypotheses about higher-order relation-
ships-we suggest that illegality arises primarily from the
first- and second-order combined effects of variables that
provide motive, opportunity, and choice.
less, considerable additional investigation is needed to Motive
establish a well-articulated body of research. Motive reflects the processes and factors that arouse and
The purpose of our article is to contribute to progress direct behavior. It is often characterized as arising from
in that direction by reporting the results of a multivariable unfulfilled needs, desires, or deficiencies that spur cor-
analysis of seven covariates thought to be associated with rective actions. Applied to corporate illegality, the con-
corporate illegality. We examined several previously un- cept of motive represents the reasons for or purposes of
tested variables, including organizational complexity and illegal activities; it serves as an answer to questions of
ethical climate. Our work also departed from the norm by "why?" In research on corporate illegality, investigation
focusing on violations of environmental regulations into motive has focused on the importance of economic
rather than antitrust infractions, which are more com- well-being in business organizations. Studies have typi-
monly analyzed in research on corporate illegality, and cally addressed the hypotheses that financial pressures
by including and separately testing administrative actions stemming from low industry or organizational profit-
in addition to the various sorts of civil and criminal in- ability motivate organizational members to acquire nec-
fractions usually assessed in illegality research. Finally, essary resources, improve competitive position, or cut
ours is one of the few studies to assess interaction effects critical costs through illegal actions.
thought to occur among the kinds of variables examined Industry Profitability. Researchers have often hy-
in this and prior research. As a result, our research pro- pothesized that firms operating in industries with low
vides grounding evidence for a more complex model of profit margins have greater difficulty meeting perfor-
corporate illegality than has been assessed in empirical mance goals and have fewer slack resources to use to
research to date. comply with legal regulations (e.g., Baucus 1994, Clinard
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
625MARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
et al. 1979, Finney and Lesieur 1982, Staw and Industry Concentration. One possible origin of op-
Szwajkowski 1975). Correspondingly, evidence on the portunity is industry concentration, the degree to which
relationship between industry profitability and corporate an industry is dominated by a few companies. Industry
illegality lends fairly consistent support to the notion that concentration has been studied primarily in relation to
illegal actions occur less often in industries with higher antitrust violations, and there are competing hypotheses
profits (Asch and Seneca 1976, Palmer 1972, Simpson about its likely effects. From one point of view, high con-
1986, Staw and Szwajkowski 1975). In what is com- centration may make illegality more feasible because col-
monly regarded as the most comprehensive study of cor- lusion is easier among small numbers of firms (Clinard
porate illegality, Clinard et al. (1979) found that, although et al. 1979) and because the larger firms most often found
the effects were small, firms operating in industries with in concentrated industries are sometimes able to influence
larger profit margins did violate the law less frequently regulatory agencies. Several studies seem to support this
than firms in less profitable industries. Consistent with hypothesis (Clinard et al. 1979, Hay and Kelley 1974,
this finding, we hypothesized as follows.
HYPOTHESIS 1. Lower industry profitability is asso-
ciated with greater corporate illegality.
Leonard and Weber 1970). Conversely, other researchers
have suggested that moderate to lower levels of concen-
tration are more conducive to illegality, because scrutiny,
detection, publicity, and retaliation are less likely in a
Organizational Profitability. The motive to engage in diffused industry (e.g., Szwajkowski 1986). A few studies
illegality has also been attributed to concerns about or- have supported this line of thinking (Burton 1966, Riedel
ganizational profitability, and financial strain within a 1968). However, in contrast to both of these viewpoints,
firm has been hypothesized to be a major motivational one study of the relationship between industry concentra-
factor. Initial studies typically showed a significant neg- tion and corporate illegality failed to find any statistically
ative relationship between firm profitability and corporate significant effects at all (Posner 1970).
illegality (Asch and Seneca 1976, Cochran and Nigh As industry concentration research has focused almost
1987, Lane 1953, Staw and Szwajkowski 1975). How- exclusively on antitrust violations, it seems questionable
ever, later studies that have included broader categories whether any sort of relationship is likely between industry
of violations have failed to produce confirmatory evi- concentration and other types of corporate illegality. Nev-
dence (Baucus and Near 1991, Hill et al. 1992, Yeager ertheless, because Clinard et al. (1979) did find general
1981). The benchmark study by Clinard et al. (1979) indications that high concentration might be correlated
found that firms with profit problems violated the law with several types of violations, we decided to assess the
more frequently, but that profitable firms also had many following hypothesis.
violations. Despite the conflicting evidence, the most re-
cent models of corporate illegality still propose a negative
relationship between firm profitability and corporate vi-
olations (Baucus 1994, Coleman 1987). For our study,
we hypothesized as follows.
HYPOTHESIS 2. Lower organizational profitability is
associated with greater corporate illegality.
HYPOTHESIS 3. Higher levels of industry concentra-
tion are associated with greater corporate illegality.
Organization Size. Researchers have also suggested
that opportunity originates in various internal, structural
attributes of organizations. Most thoroughly studied
among these attributes is organization size, usually de-
fined as the number of members in the organization; the
Opportunity organization's sales, gross revenues, or net profits; the
Whereas motive refers to the arousal of behavior, oppor- organization's capacity to render services; or the quantity
tunity means the presence of a favorable combination of of assets held by the firm (Gooding and Wagner 1985).
circumstances that makes a particular course of action As suggested by Yeager (1986), an important way in
possible. The opportunity to engage in corporate illegality which larger size might afford greater opportunity for cor-
arises when the conditions needed to carry out illegal acts porate illegality is through its provision of the slack re-
are present and when individuals and groups can break sources necessary to absorb legal expenses, court fees,
laws and expect, with reasonable confidence, to avoid de- punitive awards, and similar costs of illegality. Accord-
tection or significant retribution. Hence, research on op- ingly, larger firms should not be as fearful of the conse-
portunity explores which factors or combinations of fac- quences of illegality as smaller ones. Larger firms, how-
tors will provide sufficient ease, anonymity, or rewards ever, are also more likely to have the resources necessary
to be conducive to corporate illegality. These factors in- to meet regulations without undue distress, and thus
clude industry concentration, organization size, struc- might be less inclined to break the law (Yeager 1986).
tural complexity, and organizational decentralization. Moreover, large size may make firms more visible and
626
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
their actions may therefore be more likely to be detected of subunits, levels of hierarchy, and number of operating
and prosecuted. sites increase (Hall 1991, Price and Mueller 1986).
Adding confusion to the issue of the effects of orga- Complexity defined in this way provides the opportu-
nization size is a controversy about whether the relation- nity for illegality because of the problems it causes in
ship between size and violations should be assessed as a coordination, communication, and managerial control
proportionate or an absolute relationship. Researchers fa- (Finney and Lesieur 1982). In particular, complexity im-
voring a proportionate measure argue that larger firms are pedes information flows, reducing top managers' knowl-
involved in more activities, so violations should be ex- edge about daily operations (Donaldson 1982, Jackall
amined in terms of the number per unit size of the cor- 1988, Stone 1975). The reduction of information flows
poration (Clinard et al. 1979, Hill et al. 1992). Others may lead to deliberate lawbreaking if it makes illegalities
(e.g., Dalton and Kesner 1988) contend that absolute easier to hide. Fragmented communication may also lead
measures are more appropriate because they reflect the to unintentional violations of the law if people lack the
direct effects hypothesized by most researchers. Using an information necessary to make consciously lawful deci-
absolute measure, several researchers have found a pro- sions.
nounced positive relationship between organization size Several case studies have uncovered anecdotal evi-
and corporate illegality (Asch and Seneca 1976, Baucus dence supporting a relationship between complexity and
and Near 1991, Cochran and Nigh 1987, Dalton and illegality (Herling 1962, Ungar 1972, Vandivier 1972). In
Kesner 1988, Perez 1978). Using a proportionate mea- addition, Cochran and Nigh (1987) examined the rela-
sure, Clinard et al. (1979) found that larger firms had tionship between illegality and complexity, and found
about the same number of violations per standard unit of positive results. However, they defined complexity in an
size ($100 million in sales) as smaller firms, and Hill et unusual way as firm size, firm growth, product diversifi-
al. (1992) found a relationship between size and illegality cation, and percentage of assets abroad. Therefore, large-
for some types of violations, but not for others.
Considering the two approaches together, we see that
findings based on proportional measures generally sub-
stantiate the presence of a monotonic relationship be-
tween size and illegality, and this same relationship is
detected as a positive relationship in research based on
absolute measures. In keeping with the most recent re-
search on the subject (Hill et al. 1992), we used a pro-
portionate measure. We posited a positive relationship to
avoid proposing a test of the null hypothesis.
HYPOTHESIS 4. Larger organizational size is associ-
ated with greater corporate illegality.
Structural Complexity. Complexity is a second struc-
tural characteristic hypothesized to act as a source of op-
portunity and contribute to corporate illegality
sample quantitative research has yet to examine this re-
lationship in sufficient detail. Using the traditional defi-
nition of complexity, we hypothesized that:
HYPOTHESIS 5. Greater structural complexity is as-
sociated with greater corporate illegality.
Organizational Decentralization. Decentralization, a
third structural characteristic considered in research on
corporate illegality, refers to the locus and dispersion of
decision making in an organization. In a centralized or-
ganization, decision making is the sole prerogative of up-
per managers. In contrast, decision making in a decen-
tralized organization is dispersed downward and outward
among the membership. Decentralization (reduced cen-
tralization) of decision making provides the opportunity
to pursue corporate illegality because it allows more peo-
ple the freedom to decide what to do. Tied with this
(Braithwaite 1985, Clinard and Yeager 1980, Donaldson greater freedom to decide and enact is a tendency toward
1982, Finney and Lesieur 1982). Structural complexity is diffusion of responsibility that occurs when many people
the degree of spread and segmentation in an organiza-
tion's structure, reflecting the combined effects of hori-
zontal, vertical, and spatial differentiation. Horizontal dif-
are perceived to be responsible for making and imple-
menting a particular decision. According to Clinard et al.
(1979), illegality becomes increasingly likely as these
ferentiation arises as complex work is decomposed into conditions promote the abdication of personal responsi-
networks of interdependent jobs. Vertical differentiation bility.
develops as direct supervision is needed to coordinate or- To date, only one study (Hill et al. 1992) has examined
ganizational behavior. Spatial differentiation occurs as an the relationship between organizational decentralization
organization' s operations become geographically dis- and corporate illegality, and it produced no significant
persed. By definition, greater differentiation of any type results. Nonetheless, because speculation about this vari-
produces greater structural complexity, and the most able has always been intense, we examined the relation-
complex structures incorporate all three types. An orga- ship again, using a more comprehensive measure and hy-
nization therefore becomes more complex as its number pothesizing as follows.
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
627MARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
HYPOTHESIS 6. Greater organizational decentrali-
1983, Molander 1987, Weller 1988). Other recommen-
zation is associated with greater corporate illegality. dations are that training programs, workshops, and dis-
Choice ethics and legality a routine aspect of organizational life
cussion groups should be used to make discussions about
If both motive and opportunity are present, the choice to (Eckner 1983, Waters and Bird 1987), and that this focus
engage in illegality generally depends on the degree to on ethics should be emphasized and reinforced by top
which evaluative preferences favor or disfavor illegal be- managers through policy statements and speeches
haviors (e.g., Baucus 1994, Finney and Lesieur 1982). On (Laczniak 1983). Additional ethical practices commonly
the commonplace assumption that bad people do bad advocated include mechanisms for reporting legal-ethical
things, research on choice first assessed the effects of violations, social audits, and the incorporation of ethics
various psychological factors and personal values. De- into selection, performance appraisal, discipline, and job
spite many attempts (Bromberg 1965, Cohen et al. 1956, analysis procedures (Buchholz 1989, Goddard 1988,
Spelling 1944, Spencer 1965, Sutherland 1949), early in- Laczniak 1983, Molander 1987). Finally, experts assert
vestigators failed to uncover personal characteristics that
could differentiate consistently between offenders and
nonoffenders. Researchers thus concluded that personal
characteristics provide little or no insight into choice
(Conklin 1977, Geis 1985), and they speculated that so-
cietal norms and related organizational characteristics
might be important determinants of choice (Coleman
1987, Ermann and Lundman 1982a).
Over the last two decades, therefore, concern has es-
calated rapidly about the ethical climate of organizations,
defined as "the prevailing perceptions of typical organi-
zational practices and procedures that have ethical con-
tent" (Victor and Cullen 1988, p. 101). It is commonly
thought that because the law is an expression of a broad
moral consensus (Finney and Lesieur 1982), an organi-
zation's ethical climate will serve as modifier of motive
and opportunity, either prompting or discouraging orga-
nizations from engaging in illegal behavior (Buchholz
1989, Clinard and Yeager 1980, Ermann and Lundman
1982b, Stone 1975, Victor and Cullen 1988, Waters 1978,
Waters and Bird 1987). This line of reasoning reflects
Sutherland's (1949) early thesis that proclivities toward
illegality are likely to be influenced by organizational
norms that stipulate expectations about legal compliance.
Many recommendations have been offered as to how
organizations can stimulate a positive ethical climate.
Widespread agreement is evident on the importance of
establishing ethical codes that affirm legality (Feinberg
and Serlen 1988, Laczniak 1983, Mathews 1987,
Molander 1987, Sanderson and Varner 1984). Experts of-
ten state that effective codes of ethics must specify sanc-
tions and enforcement provisions as well as means of in-
vestigation and detection (Buchholz 1989, Molander
that top managers must address the potential for conflicts
between profits or productivity and legal constraints so
that employees become aware that such conflicts are not
automatically resolved in favor of the former (Molander
1987, Waters and Bird 1987).
Despite the practical importance accorded to ethical
climate, research examining the relationship between eth-
ical climate and corporate illegality has consisted mainly
of a few case analyses and field interviews (e.g., Ermann
and Lundman 1982a, b; Jackall 1988). In one such study,
Clinard (1983) interviewed 64 retired managers from
Fortune 500 corporations and reported that the behavior
and philosophy of top managers was mentioned most of-
ten as the reason for acts of illegality. Hill et al. (1992)
found that companies that considered only rate of return
when evaluating divisional performance had a higher
level of legal violations. The only large-scale empirical
study in the area of ethical climate was done by Mathews
(1987), who content analyzed 212 firms' ethical codes to
determine the effect of codes on illegality. Somewhat sur-
prisingly, the study showed little relationship between
ethical codes and corporate illegality, leading Mathews
to speculate that the link between words and behaviors
must be demonstrated by top managers for codes to ef-
fectively curb illegal activity.
Researchers routinely assert that ethical climate is
likely to exert a strong influence on illegality (e.g.,
Yeager 1986). However, in light of Mathews' (1987)
findings, further empirical investigation is required before
such statements can be accepted as valid. Hence, we hy-
pothesized as follows.
HYPOTHESIS 7. A weaker ethical climate is associ-
ated with greater corporate illegality.
1987, Weller 1988), that ethical codes should be con- Multivariable Effects
structed and updated through participatory processes that Although researchers have sometimes proposed that fac-
involve employees at all levels (Feinberg and Serlen tors promoting illegality do so by exerting complex, mul-
1988), and that codes should be publicized and commu- tivariable effects (e.g., Baucus 1994, Clinard and Yeager
nicated regularly (Gross and Shichman 1987, Laczniak 1980, Vaughn 1982), early empirical investigations of
628
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
corporate illegality typically employed case analysis, HYPOTHESIS 8c. The relationship between industry
mean comparisons, or correlational designs to draw con- profitability and corporate illegality is strengthened by
clusions about elementary relationships, and more recent larger organization size.
studies have used regression methods to assess the si-
multaneous zero-order effects of collections of industry
characteristics and organizational attributes. Throughout
this research, which is summarized in Table 1, results
HYPOTHESIS 8d. The relationship between organi-
zational profitability and corporate illegality is strength-
ened by larger organization size.
have shown some evidence of statistically significant ef- HYPOTHESIS 8e. The relationship between industry
fects, but many theorized relationships have failed to re- profitability and corporate illegality is strengthened by
ceive empirical support. Findings of statistical nonsignif- greater structural complexity.
icance are especially prevalent in later, more rigorous
studies. They suggest that there are only a few statistically
significant zero-order relationships. However, such re-
sults may be due in part to the particular industries, or-
ganizations, covariates, or types of laws and illegality ex-
HYPOTHESIS 8f. The relationship between organiza-
tional profitability and corporate illegality is strength-
ened by greater structural complexity.
HYPOTHESIS 8g. The relationship between industry
amined in the research. It therefore seems premature to profitability and corporate illegality is strengthened by
give up completely on industry characteristics and orga- higher organizational decentralization.
nizational attributes as zero-order covariates of corporate
illegality without first considering additional multivari-
able evidence. Further research, such as the study re-
ported here, seems necessary before definitive conclu-
sions can be reached.
Beyond these basic effects, the three-way model we
propose indicates that interactions among variables in the
categories of motive, opportunity, and choice could have
noteworthy effects on illegal activity. Consistent with this
model, Coleman (1987) and Vaughn (1982) argued that
the motivation to commit an illegal act must be examined
in the context of opportunity, for it is opportunity that
makes an aroused behavioral option actionable. By this
logic, cautious conjecture suggests that motive and op-
portunity might combine to influence illegality in a man-
ner such that relationships between motivational factors
(industry profitability, organizational profitability) and il-
legal activities are moderated by the influence of oppor-
HYPOTHESIS 8h. The relationship between organi-
zational profitability and corporate illegality is strength-
ened by higher organizational decentralization.
Finney and Lesieur (1982) further theorized that
whether criminogenic tensions or conditions will result
in criminal acts depends on the presence and strength of
effective social controls. This idea suggests that variables
we have identified as offering motive or choice might
interact in a manner such that relationships between mo-
tivational factors (industry profitability, organizational
profitability) and illegality are influenced by the effects
of choice (ethical climate), and, in addition, that the pre-
dicted negative zero-order effects of choice on illegality
might also carry over as negative moderator effects, thus
attenuating relationships between motivation and illegal-
ity. Stemming from this possibility are two hypotheses
about first-order interactions between motive and choice.
tunity factors (industry concentration, organization size, HYPOTHESIS 9a. The relationship between industry
structural complexity, organizational decentralization). profitability and corporate illegality is weakened by a
Also suggested is the possibility that opportunity factors, stronger ethical climate.
all of which are predicted to have positive zero-order ef-
fects, might likewise exert positive moderator effects and
increase the strength of basic relationships between mo-
tivation and illegality. Hence, the following eight hy-
HYPOTHESIS 9b. The relationship between organi-
zational profitability and corporate illegality is weakened
by a stronger ethical climate.
potheses pertain to first-order interactions between the Also implied by Finney and Lesieur (1982) is the pos-
two motive and four opportunity factors considered in our sibility that opportunity could interact with choice in a
manner such that relationships between opportunity fac-
study.
HYPOTHESIS 8a. The relationship between industry
profitability and corporate illegality is strengthened by
higher industry concentration.
tors (industry concentration, organization size, structural
complexity, organizational decentralization) and illegal-
ity are moderated by evaluative preferences originating
in choice (ethical climate). Suggested by this possibility
HYPOTHESIS 8b. The relationship between organi- are four hypotheses related to first-order interactions be-
zational profitability and corporate illegality is strength- tween the four opportunity variables and the single choice
ened by higher industry concentration. variable we have described.
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
629MARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
Table 1 Research Chronology: Major Studies of Corporate Illegality*
Predictor
Statistical
Study Category Hypothesis Sample Technique Illegality Type
Lane(1953) Motive Employment over Time(+) 275 Firms Not Specified Antitrust, Court Cases
Firm Size (0)
Opportunity Geographic Location (+) Labor Relations, Court
Cases
Burton (1966) Opportunity Industry Concentration 127 Cases Chi-square Antitrust, Court Cases
(+ at low-moderate levels)
Riedel (1968) Oppurtunity Industry Concentration Not Available Not Available Antitrust, Court Cases
(+ at moderate levels)
Posner (1970) Opportunity Industry Concentration (0) 1,551 Cases Not Specified Antitrust, Court Cases
Palmer (1972) Motive Industry Profit (-) 74 Cases Z-statistic Antitrust, Court Cases
Opportunity Industry Concentration (+)
Hay and Kelley (1974) Opportunity Industry Concentration(+) 65 Cases Not Specified Antitrust, Court Cases
Fewness of Numbers (+)
Product Homogeneity (+)
Staw and Szwajkowski Motive Industry Profit (-) 105 Cases Z-statistic Unfair Trade, Court
(1975)
Firm
Profit
(-)
Cases
Firm Profit per Industry (0)
Asch and Seneca Motive Firm Profit(-) 101 Firms Regression Antitrust, Court Cases
(1976)
Firm
Size
(+)
Industry Concentration (?)
Clinard et al. (1979)** Motive Firm Profit (-) 582 Firms Stepwise Administrative,
Industry Profit (-) Regression Environmental,
Firm
Firm
Growth
Labor
Rate
(0)
Intensity
Financial,
(+)
Labor,
Manufacturing,
Unfair Trade, Court
and Agency
Cases***
Opportunity Greater Market Power (-)
Diversification (0)
Capital Invested Abroad (-)
Firm Size (0)
Simpson (1986) Motive Firm Profit (0) 52 Firms Time Series Antitrust, Court Cases
Industry Profit (-) Analysis/
Stock
Price
(+)
Regression
Unemployment (+)
Cochran and Nigh Motive Firm Profit (-) 434 Firms Regression Clinard et al. Data,
(1987)
Industry
Profit
Firm
(0)
Serious
Liquidity
(0)
Violations
Only
Opportunity Firm Size (+)
Firm Diversification (0)
Firm Growth (+)
Firm Multinationality (0)
Mathews (1987) Choice Ethical Codes (0) 485 Firms Regression Consumer, Court and
Agency Cases
Environmental, Court
and Agency Cases
Dalton and Kesner Opportunity Firm Size(+) 384 Firms Contingency Unfair Trade, Court
(1988)
Analysis
Cases
630 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/VOl. 8, NO. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
Table 1 Continued
Predictor
Statistical
Study Category Hypothesis Sample Technique Illegality Type
Baucus and Near Motive Firm Profit (0) 141 Cases Event History Product Liability, Court
(1991)
Low
Firm
Slack
(0)
Analysis/
Cases
Scarce Environment (?) Stepwise
Regression
Opportunity Heterogenous Environment (0) Antitrust, Court Cases
Firm
Size
Dynamic
(+)
Discrimination,
Environment
(+)
Court
Cases
Industry (+)
Choice Prior Violations (+)
Hill et al. (1992) Motive Firm Profit (0) 174 Firms Regression OSHA, Court and
Agency Cases***
Opportunity Firm Size (0/+) Environmental,
Firm
Diversification
(0)
Court
Cases***
Decentralization (0)
Choice Evaluation Criteria (+)
Incentive Systems (0)
*The well-known case/industry studies of Leonard and Weber (1970), Sonnenfeld and Lawrence (1978), Waters (1978), and Vaughn (1983)
are not included in the table because they did not involve the testing of specific hypotheses.
**Because the Clinard et al. study was so extensive, only the general findings are reported. Several of the hypotheses tested produced
exceptions for a particular violation type.
'This study used a proportionate violation measure.
HYPOTHESIS lOa. The relationship between industry strength of first-order interactions between motive and
concentration and corporate illegality is weakened by a opportunity variables. In light of the eight interactions
stronger ethical climate. between motive and opportunity specified in H8a through
HYPOTHESIS lOb. The relationship between organi-
zation size and corporate illegality is weakened by a
stronger ethical climate.
H8h, we assessed the following hypotheses.
HYPOTHESIS 1 la. Stronger ethical climate attenuates
the interactive effect of industry profitability and industry
HYPOTHESIS 10c. The relationship between struc-
tural complexity and corporate illegality is weakened by
a stronger ethical climate.
HYPOTHESIS lOd. The relationship between organi-
zational decentralization and corporate illegality is
weakened by a stronger ethical climate.
Considered together, the statements of Coleman
concentration on illegality.
HYPOTHESIS 1 lb. Stronger ethical climate attenuates
the interactive effect of organizational profitability and
industiy concentration on illegality.
HYPOTHESIS 1 ic. Stronger ethical climate attenuates
the interactive effect of industry profitability and orga-
nization size on illegality.
(1987), Vaughn (1982), and Finney and Lesieur (1982) HYPOTHESIS 1 l d. Stronger ethical climate attenuates
also support speculation about our three-way model, that the interactive effect of organizational profitability and
is, that the influence of opportunity and motive might be organization size on illegalitv.
altered by the presence and effects of choice. If this
speculation is correct, ethical climate should exert im-
portant second-order effects on interactions between mo-
tive and opportunity. In particular, in a manner reflecting
the attenuating effects hypothesized to occur in zero- and
HYPOTHESIS 1 le. Stronger ethical climate attenu-
ates the interactive effect of industry profitability and
structural complexity on illegality.
HYPOTHESIS 1 lf. Stronger ethical climate attenuates
first-order relationships, second-order effects exerted by the interactive effect of organizational profitability and
choice (ethical climate) seem most likely to affect the structural complexity on illegality.
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
631MARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
HYPOTHESIS 11g. Stronger ethical climate attenu-
ates the interactive effect of industry profitability and or-
ganizational decentralization on illegality.
HYPOTHESIS 1 lh. Stronger ethical climate attenu-
ates the interactive effect of organizational profitability
and organizational decentralization on illegality.
(the usual period required to process and publicize a vi-
olation ranges from about one month to two years).
Environmental violations are under the jurisdiction of
two federal agencies, the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Coast Guard. The EPA has
four major functions; it administers federal environmental
laws, sets standards, ensures compliance, and performs
Thus far, Hill et al. (1992) are the only researchers to supportive research (Steiner and Steiner 1988). The
have tested interaction hypotheses, and they found no agency oversees the following major areas of legislation:
support for the presence of higher-order relationships. Be- air quality, water quality, solid and toxic waste disposal,
cause of the absence of additional empirical evidence, toxic chemicals, radiation, and noise pollution. Our study
further grounding seems necessary before meaningful included all enforcement actions under the jurisdiction of
conclusions can be reached about interaction effects. To the EPA.
provide this empirical grounding, we considered addi- The U.S. Coast Guard is responsible for maritime law
tional evidence about the main effects exerted by covar- enforcement. Among its responsibilities is the control and
iates acting as sources of motive, opportunity, or choice, prevention of water pollution. The agency monitors
but also examined the possibility that interactions among dumping and spills from vessels and the release of pol-
motive, opportunity, and choice variables might have sta- lutants into the water from land-based companies. Our
tistically significant effects beyond those attributable to study included only violations committed by land-based
zero-order relationships. companies.
After deciding that a violation has taken place, an
agency can initiate administrative, civil, or criminal pro-
Method ceedings against a company. Seven enforcement out-
To begin analysis, we first needed an operational defini- comes are possible: warnings, recalls, agency and court
tion of corporate illegality. Prior research has provided orders, injunctions, monetary fines, and criminal prose-
several alternatives, as researchers have examined such cution of officers. Most studies of corporate illegality
illegal activities as antitrust violations (Clinard et al. have used only court cases, which reflect civil and crim-
1979, Simpson 1986), various other unfair market prac- inal enforcement proceedings. Commonly accepted defi-
tices (Hay and Kelley 1974, Staw and Szwajkowski nitions of corporate illegality, however, specify that it in-
1975), OSHA violations (Hill et al. 1992), and employ- volves any action punishable by administrative, civil, or
ment discrimination (Baucus and Near 1991). We con- criminal law (Clinard et al. 1979, Reiss and Biderman
sidered each of those alternatives, but ultimately decided 1980, Schrager and Short 1978, Yeager 1986). Therefore,
to focus our attention on violations of U.S. environmental our study included administrative, civil, and criminal vi-
laws. Choosing to study environmental violations enabled olations.
us to add further generalizability to the growing body of Like all research on corporate illegality, our study used
knowledge about corporate illegality, because few studies a measure of illegality that reflected only violations that
have addressed environmental laws. Environmental vio- had been detected and reported publicly. Hence, the vi-
lations also seemed an attractive operational definition olation counts assessed in our analyses were probably un-
because of the public availability of data about relevant derstated, possibly increasing the conservatism of our
indictments and convictions, coupled with the fact that analyses and statistical conclusions. Clinard et al. (1979)
environmental laws are among the ones most frequently estimated that such understatement may approach 25% to
violated by U.S. firms.
33% of the actual level of illegality. However, as Clinard
In deciding on this operational definition, we chose to and Yeager (1980) maintained, there is no reason to sus-
collect data on violations that had occurred during the pect that undetected violations differ in make-up from
five-year period from 1983 through 1987. By collecting ones that are detected. If this is true, understatement is
data on five years of occurrences, we were able to en- unlikely to create major systematic biases in research
hance variation in our criterion variable relative to that such as ours.
which would have been captured in a study of shorter
duration. Moreover, by ending our period of observation Sample
in 1987, five years before the date of initial data analysis, Focusing on violations of environmental laws necessarily
we were able to compensate for typical lags in the pub- restricted our sampling activities to the population of pub-
lication of information about environmental violations licly held manufacturing companies located in the United
632
ORGANIZATION SCIENCENVol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
States, because environmental laws are generally aimed of 80. Assessment of size, as measured by number of
at curtailing pollution produced by manufacturing opera- employees, showed that larger firms were more likely to
tions, and public ownership necessitates the open disclo- respond to our questionnaires. However, assessment of
sure of otherwise unavailable information about several industry and proportionate number of violations did not
of the variables included in the study. To assemble our reveal evidence of differences that might produce serious
sample we consulted the 1988 edition of Ward's Business response bias.
Directory, which provides an annual listing of the largest
1,000 public corporations in the United States. We nar- Use of Key Informants
rowed the list by removing all non-manufacturing orga- We used a combination of survey and archival data in
nizations (companies whose primary SIC code was out- constructing measures of our independent variables. In
side the 2,000-3,999 classification). Next, we eliminated gathering questionnaire information on some of the
companies that had changed to private ownership and organization-level covariates, we used key (single) in-
companies that had been absorbed by another firm during formants rather than corroborative (multiple) informants.
the 1983-1987 period. Finally, we also removed com- By definition, informants, whose role is to report on or-
panies whose activities were particularly dispersed (i.e., ganizational (or other aggregate) processes, events, and
less than 50% of the firm's business was conducted by outcomes, differ from respondents, who are providers of
the parent organization or a single subsidiary) because information about personal feelings, opinions, and behav-
dispersion made it impossible to track violation data with iors. Accordingly, respondents should be sampled ran-
acceptable accuracy. The final sample consisted of 359 domly, to catch variance in the responses of a represen-
organizations. tative sample of individuals, whereas informants should
Within a one-month period, two different question-
be sampled according to expertise, with more expert in-
naires were sent to key informants in each of the 359 dividuals being preferred over less knowledgeable alter-
organizations. One survey measured ethical climate and natives (Seidler 1974).
was sent to a key informant in the human resource de- Among informants, another important consideration is
partment. For this survey, informants' names were ac- the type of question being asked and information being
quired from annual reports and several human resource requested (e.g., Pennings 1973, Sathe 1978). Question-
directories. A second key informant received another naire procedures ask informants for their perceptions of
mailed questionnaire that asked for information about or opinions about organization-level phenomena, typi-
structural complexity and decentralization. These names cally by using Likert agree-disagree items to elicit re-
were obtained from the executives and officers section of sponses. Multiple informants should be polled to ensure
1987 annual reports. A measurement appendix of the the collection of a representative cross section of expert
items in these questionnaires can be obtained from the opinions (Kumar et al. 1993). Institutional procedures
(which can involve questionnaire administration, despite
authors.
We used separate questionnaires for three reasons.
contrary connotations) ask informants to report specific
First, both surveys were quite long, and combining them facts or demographic information, for instance, the num-
into one questionnaire would have resulted in an instru- ber of years a firm has been in business or the number of
ment of formidable length. Second, collecting data from levels in an organization's hierarchy. Here it is more im-
multiple sources eliminated common-source artifacts that portant to identify the most expert individuals and limit
might otherwise have distorted our findings (Crampton data collection procedures accordingly. If one individual
and Wagner 1994). Third, the two questionnaires sought is clearly more expert than others, or if several individuals
substantially different types of information, and we rea- have precisely the same sort of expertise, sampling can
soned that different people would be most able to provide be limited to a single key informant (Heide and John
accurate responses. In case our identification of key in- 1990, Provan and Skinner 1989). Our use of institutional
formants proved faulty, each survey was preceded by a measures to collect factual information justified our use
written request that it be forwarded to a more qualified of single key informants.
Table 2 summarizes salient characteristics of the key
expert if necessary.
Informants in 121 firms (34%) returned completed, us-
informants who provided data for the study. In most in-
able ethical climate questionnaires, and informants in 207 stances, top managers completed the structure question-
firms (58%) returned completed, usable structure ques- naire and human resource personnel completed the ethical
tionnaires. The number of firms with complete responses climate questionnaire. However, differences in rank and
to both questionnaires was 81 (23%), from which we function are evident among the informants who re-
dropped one extreme outlier and created a final sample sponded to each questionnaire. Apparently, the locus of
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
633MARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
Table 2 Characteristics of Key Informants and Violation Frequency by Sample
Initial Returns Final Sample
Structure Ethics Structure Ethics
Questionnaire Questionnaire Questionnaire Questionnaire
Characteristic
Organizational
Official
(n
Tenure
=
207)
(n
(years)
=
120)
19.5
(n
=
14.6
80)
(n
18.4
=
80)
16.2
Title
President, Executive, Group or Senior VP; Corporate Officer 43% 3% 35% 4%
Vice
President
Executive
HR
Director
or
38%
Manager
General
Counsel
Ethics
Other
Number
or
25%
Director
-
11%
Attorney
-
13%
Violations
relevant expertise differed among organizations, and
22%
16%
Specialist
of
36%
6%
-
-
20%
4,130
20%
11%
16%
7%
27%
9%
-
-
17%
8%
13%
1,731
the number of violations per firm by firm size (number
many initial recipients followed our suggestion to for- of employees) to conform with measurement suggestions
ward our questionnaire to someone more expert than by Clinard et al. (1979) and Hill et al. (1992). This pro-
themselves.
cedure produced two criterion variables for each of our
sample firms: the number of serious violations per 1,000
Measures
Corporate Illegality. We obtained information about
enforcement actions from government documents and
1OK reports. To acquire government documents, we sent
Freedom of Information requests to the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Coast Guard En-
vironmental Division. Both furnished extensive printouts
of all enforcement actions that had taken place between
1983 and 1987.
The second source of data about environmental viola-
tions, corporate 10K reports, was requested and obtained
by mail from firms that responded to both of our ques-
tionnaires. The 1OK reports proved to be especially useful
in providing verification of environmental cases that
ended in litigation.
From those two sources of data, we identified 5,080
violations attributable to our initial sample, 4,130 attrib-
employees and the number of nonserious violations per
1,000 employees.
Industry Profitability. Using data obtained from Dun
and Bradstreet's Industry Norms and Key Business Ra-
tios, we measured industry profitability as the five-year
(1983-1987) average return on assets for the four-digit
SIC industry in which the firm did the largest share of its
business.
Firm Profitability. Using annual reports and Dun and
Bradstreet data, we calculated firm profitability as the dif-
ference between a firm's average return on assets (ROA)
and its industry's average ROA during the five year pe-
riod (1983-1987). This approach controlled for differ-
ences among industries that might otherwise have con-
tributed to exogenous variation in our profitability
measure.
utable to firms that returned one or both of our question- Industry Concentration. Our measure of industry
naires, and 1,731 attributable to the 80 organizations in- concentration was based on data published by the Bureau
cluded in our final sample. Of the 1,731 enforcement of the Census and employed the Herfindahl-Hirshman in-
actions against the firms in our final sample, 1,575 were dex, a figure calculated by squaring and summing the
administrative actions and 156 were court proceedings. market shares of the 50 largest firms in an industry.
We designated the court proceedings as serious violations Organization Size. Using data from annual reports
and the administrative cases as nonserious violations (this and Moody's Industrial News Reports, we measured or-
differentiation of degree is consistent with conceptual dis- ganization size as the average sales (in millions) for each
cussions by Clinard et al. (1979), Finney and Lesieur firm during the period 1983-1987. This measure captured
(1982), and other experts on illegality). We then stan- prospective differences in resource flows and availability
dardized both types of violation data by proportionalizing discussed in the literature on illegality and enabled us to
634
ORGANIZATION SCIENCENVol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
consider a size covariate despite our decision to stan-
manufacturing processes are more polluting than others,
dardize our illegality measures (with an employee mea- and that environmental violations would therefore cluster
sure of size). in some industries rather than being evenly distributed
Structural Complexity. Four questions on our struc- across industries. An examination of our proportionate
tural questionnaire asked for information about vertical violation measures seemed to affirm this possibility. To
differentiation, horizontal differentiation, and spatial dif- control for potential industry effects, we constructed a
ferentiation. We verified as many of these responses as measure to designate an industry as a high violator. First,
possible by comparing them with information obtained we averaged the size-proportionate numbers of violations
from lOKs, which contain details about number of sites (combining both serious and nonserious violations)
and divisions. We then added the responses about the across the entire collection of 80 firms in our sample to
three types of differentiation together to yield a complex- produce an overall mean. Next, we clustered the 80 firms
ity index for each organization (Hall 1991, Price and into industry groups based on two-digit SIC codes. Then,
Mueller 1986).
within each two-digit industry group, we compared each
Decentralization. Data about the degree of decentral-
member firm's size-proportioned number of violations
ization were collected with a questionnaire adaptation of with the overall (sample-wide) mean. We designated as
the interview schedule used in the initial Aston study of high-violation industries those industry groups in which
structure (Pugh et al. 1968). Forty-six questions asked more than half the member firms had violation levels
informants to report the lowest hierarchical level respon- above the overall mean. Using this approach, we found
sible for making various kinds of decisions. Informants the paper, chemical, petroleum, and primary metals in-
registered their answer to each question on a six-point dustries to be atypically high violators. We factored out
scale (nonmanagerial employee = 0, nonmanagerial staff these effects by using a dummy variable (0, 1) that scored
= 1, lower management = 2, middle management = 3, 1 for any firm in SIC codes 26, 28, 29, or 33. Although
top management = 4, CEO = 5, board = 6). Responses less complete in effect than entering a dummy variable
were added together, yielding a range of possible cen- for each of the industries in our sample, this approach
tralization scores of 0 to 276. Summed scale scores were enabled us to correct for major industry differences with-
then reversed to yield a measure of decentralization such out consuming a large number of statistical degrees of
that larger numbers indicated higher decentralization. freedom.
Items in this scale produced an alpha coefficient of 0.81. Table 3 reports the means, standard deviations, and in-
Ethical Climate. Data about ethical climate were ob- tercorrelations for the variables included in our study. Be-
tained by a 47-item mailed questionnaire based on the cause our questionnaires measuring covariates were
ethical practices questionnaire developed by Bentley Col- mailed and answered after 1987 but our criterion variable
lege's Center for Business Ethics. The 47 items yielded measurement spanned the time period 1983 through
a total possible score ranging from 0 to 65. We interpreted 1987, our questionnaires contained three questions to
higher scores on the 65-point scale as indicative of help us assess potential temporal artifacts that might un-
stronger levels of ethical climate. Items in this scale pro- dermine cross-sectional conclusions. The structure ques-
duced an alpha coefficient of 0.80. tionnaire had two questions that asked whether the infor-
Industry Control. It is logical to assume that some
mant's firm had significantly changed its hierarchical
Table 3 Means, Standard Deviations, and Intercorrelations of Major Variables
Variable
Mean
SD
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1. Serious Violations 0.08 0.12
2. Nonserious Violations 0.94 1.72 0.33
3. Industry Profitability 6.79 4.23 -0.23 -0.26
4. Organizational Profitability 0.15 7.32 0.42 0.04 -0.40
5. Industry Concentration 830 694 - 0.16 -0.12 - 0.16 - 0.07
6. Organization Size 6,147 13,450 -0.05 - 0.02 - 0.22 0.11 0.35
7. Structural Complexity 75 57 -0.07 -0.14 0.03 -0.02 0.10 0.39
8. Organizational Decentralization 155 17 0.24 - 0.02 - 0.12 0.15 0.07 -0.13 -0.12
9. Ethical Climate 25 14 -0.23 -0.10 -0.09 0.07 0.07 0.20 0.23 -0.16
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997 635
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
structure or its dispersion of decision making between in the manner recommended by Stone and Hollenbeck
1983 and the date of data collection. In addition, the (1989).
ethics questionnaire had one question that asked whether To facilitate interpretation and hypothesis assessment,
the ethical practices and emphasis on ethics in the orga- we plotted all interactions revealed to be statistically sig-
nization had changed between 1983 and the date of data nificant (plotting procedures consisted of forming sub-
collection. The responses were dummy coded, with zero group samples of firms classified according to median
representing no change and one indicating that a change splits on relevant covariate and moderator variables, com-
had taken place, for use in determining whether timing puting a mean level of serious or nonserious illegality for
issues might have consequential empirical effects. each subgroup, and using the subgroup means to graph
Design and Procedure interactions as described by Kerlinger (1986)). Predicted
first-order interactions involved changes in zero-order re-
Our study was designed as a cross-sectional analysis that
lationships between individual covariates and either se-
incorporated hierarchical regression procedures, allowing
rious or nonserious violations attributable to changes in
us to isolate and analyze main and interaction effects rela-
tive to the two criterion variables, serious violations and first-order moderator variables. Each plot of one of these
nonserious violations (Cohen and Cohen 1983). Because interactions consisted of two lines, one for the zero-order
violation data of both types were truncated at zero (37 of relationship between covariate and illegality under "low"
the firms in our sample registered no serious violations first-order moderator conditions and the other for the
during the five-year period, and 12 had no nonserious same zero-order relationship under "high" first-order
violations), we employed a TOBIT regression model that moderator conditions. Within these plots, first-order mod-
uses maximum likelihood estimation and adjusts regres- erator effects occurred as differences in the slopes of the
sion coefficients to reflect limitations of range in the cri- two lines, with positive first-order moderation (i.e., the
terion variable (Maddala 1982). In the two resulting hi- strengthening effect predicted in H8a through H8h) evi-
erarchical TOBIT regressions, we entered different denced as greater slope in the line representing "high"
categories of variables in a sequence of steps, performing first-order moderator conditions and negative first-order
a TOBIT regression analysis at each step and observing moderation (i.e., the weakening effect predicted in H9a
changes in explanatory power attributable to the newly and b and HlOa through d) indicated as greater slope in
entered variables adjusted for the effects of variables en- the line representing "low" first-order moderator condi-
tered in prior steps. Entered in the first step were the tions (Cohen and Cohen 1983, Neter et al. 1985).
dummy variable representing industry differences plus Predicted second-order interactions involved changes
the seven covariates (industry profitability, organizational in first-order interactions associated with changes in
profitability, industry concentration, organization size, second-order moderator variables. Each second-order in-
structural complexity, organizational decentralization, teraction was plotted as a series of first-order interactions,
and ethical climate) to assess zero-order, main effects. In differentiated according to "low" versus "high" second-
a preliminary version of this step we also entered the three order moderator conditions, and second-order moderation
dummy variables representing the absence or presence of was assessed by examining the degree of parallelism be-
reported changes in structure, decision making, or ethical tween the two lines in each first-order plot. In particular,
practices to assess whether such changes contributed ar-
negative second-order moderator effects (i.e., the atten-
tifactual effects attributable to the temporal issues dis-
uation predicted in H1 la through h) were evidenced by
cussed previously (after finding null effects, we removed
greater parallelism (therefore, a weaker first-order effect)
these three variables to reduce the complexity of our
in the first-order interaction plotted under "high" second-
model and control the loss of statistical degrees of free-
order moderator conditions (Kerlinger 1986, Neter et al.
dom). Next, in the second step of each hierarchical anal-
1985). No positive second-order moderator effects were
ysis, eight (motive X opportunity), two (motive X
posited, although such effects would have been indicated
choice), and four (opportunity X choice) interactions
by greater parallelism in the first-order interaction plotted
were entered to capture the effects of empirically relevant
first-order interactions. Then, in a third step, eight (motive
under "low" second-order moderator conditions.
X opportunity X choice) interactions were entered to
analyze second-order interaction effects. In this way,
main effects were appraised without partialling out the Results
effects of interactions, but interaction effects were as- The preliminary dummy variable analysis failed to pro-
sessed only after partialling out the influence of main ef- duce statistically significant results, indicating that
fects (and lower-order interaction effects, as necessary), changes in structure, decision making, and ethical climate
636
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/VOl. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
that reportedly occurred in the organizations in our sam- the two types of R2 statistics yield comparable informa-
ple during the time period captured in our measure of tion about the relative significance of changes in explan-
illegality had no discernible effects. The dummy variables atory power that occur from one hierarchical step to the
therefore were eliminated and temporality issues were not next. Instead of using an F test to assess the statistical
significance of these changes in pseudo R2, TOBIT pro-
considered further.
The results of our hierarchical TOBIT analyses of se-
cedures normally incorporate a chi-square test that as-
rious and nonserious violations are reported in Tables 4 sesses whether the observed change departs from that at-
and 5, respectively. Owing to our use of TOBIT proce- tributable to chance. Thus, our tables report the results of
dures, each of the R2 statistics is a McFadden's pseudo
R2, calculated by dividing the relevant constrained like- given in the tables are unstandardized weights, and t-tests
chi-square analyses of changes in pseudo R2. Coefficients
lihood function by the associated unconstrained likeli- are of the statistical significance of individual coeffi-
hood function and then subtracting the result from one. cients.
Compared to the familiar R2, the pseudo R2 grossly As indicated in Table 4, chi-square tests verified that
understates the amount of variance in the criterion vari- all three hierarchical steps in our TOBIT analysis of
able explained by the collection of covariates. However, serious violations produced statistically significant
Table 4 TOBIT Hierarchical Regression Analysis: Serious Violations with Main Effects, First-order, and Second-order
Interactions
Step Pseudo R2 AR2 Chi Square Change Variable Coeff. T-test
1.
0.08**
-
-
Industry
(Control
Variable)
0.156069
3.38**
Industry Profitability (IP) -0.003045 -0.56
Organizational Profitability (OP) 0.007695 2.82**
Industry Concentration (IC) 0.000016 0.52
Organization Size (OS) 0.000000 0.07
Structural Complexity (SC) 0.000206 0.57
Organizational Decentralization (OD) 0.001149 1.00
Ethical Climate (EC) - 0.001103 -0.79
2.
0.19**
0.11
61.10**
IP
x
OP
OS
OP x OS
x
IP
OP
IP
x
OP
IC
0.07
84.58**
IP
x
-0.11
-0.07
0.000198
OD
EC
x
-0.47
-0.000008
OD
x
0.73
0.000000
-0.000011
SC
x
-0.77
0.000000
-
SC
x
-0.87
-0.000003
x
IP
0.26**
-0.000006
IC
IP
OP
3.
IC
x
0.59
0.000333
-0.000263
EC
EC
1.20
-0.62
0.000017
0.000005
0.04
2.30*
OS x EC -0.000000 -0.38
SC x EC -0.000004 -0.19
OD x
x
IC
OP
IP
x
OP
IP
OP
IP
OP
x
x
x
x
IC
x
SC
OD
OD
EC
x
x
x
x
EC
EC
2.26*
3.43**
0.000003
-0.000031
EC
2.11*
0.000001
0.000004
EC
EC
x
-3.38**
0.000001
EC
x
OS
SC
-0.000265
EC
OS
x
x
EC
x
2.52*
-2.37*
-0.000018
-0.000052
-0.000006
-1.33
-2.18*
-0.43
*p 0.05.
**p 0.01.
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/VOl. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997 637
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
Table 5 TOBIT Hierarchical Regression Analysis: Nonserious Violations with Main Effects, First-order, and Second-order
Interactions
Step Pseudo R2 AR2 Chi Square Change Variable Coeff. T-test
1.
0.07**
-
-
Industry
(Control
Variable)
1.576050
3.36**
Industry Profitability (IP) -0.096391 -1.75
Organizational Profitability (OP) - 0.010110 - 0.73
Industry Concentration (IC) 0.000094 0.77
Organization Size (OS) 0.000001 0.10
Structural Complexity (SC) - 0.003893 - 1.04
Organizational Decentralization (OD) - 0.007701 - 0.65
Ethical Climate (EC) -0.003785 -0.26
2.
0.09**
0.02
26.50
IP
x
OP
IP
IP
x
OP
0.02
32.04
IP
OD
x
IP
0.11**
SC
x
OP x EC
IC x EC
OS x EC
SC x
x
x
IC
OP
IP
OP
IP
x
x
OP
IP
x
OP
x
-0.26
-0.001264 -0.27
0.000014
-0.000001
OS x
x
SC
OD
OD
0.49
-0.44
0.000195
-0.001133
x
x
-0.15
-0.001410
EC
OS
SC
x
-0.23
-0.16
EC
IC
x
0.97
-0.000346
EC
x
x
0.26
0.001210
-0.000476
EC
OD
0.84
0.000003 -0.000652
OD
x
0.66
-0.01
0.000011
OS
SC
x
IP
-0.000000
OS
x
OP
0.000061
IC
x
OP
3.
IC
x
0.58
-1.14
0.000007
EC
EC
EC
EC
0.60
-0.000001
0.000000
-0.19
0.22
-0.000003 -1.51
-0.000127 -0.66
x EC 0.000270 1.37
x EC 0.000168 0.50
0.000130 0.58
x
EC
*p 0.05.
**p 0.01.
increases in explained effects. In the first hierarchical
interactions, shown in Figure 1, support HlOa and HiOd:
step, t-tests of the main effects of the seven covariates stronger ethical climate attenuated the effects of industry
indicated that organizational profitability, a motive factor, concentration and decentralization, respectively (num-
formed a positive, statistically significant association with bers reported in the plots are subgroup means on our pro-
corporate illegality, in contrast to the negative relation- portional measure of serious illegality). The plot in Figure
ship proposed in Hi. A t-test of the effects of our industry 1B also reveals evidence of a positive zero-order rela-
control variable also showed evidence of a positive, sta- tionship between decentralization and illegality under
tistically significant relationship. No other statistically conditions characterized by a weak ethical climate, pro-
significant zero-order relationships were detected. viding limited evidence consistent with H6. However, the
The second hierarchical step of our analysis of serious plot in Figure 1A indicates negative zero-order relation-
violations, which assessed the 14 first-order interactions ships between industry concentration and illegality under
designated in H8a through H1Od, indicated that two of conditions of both weak and strong ethical climate, in
the 14 interactions, those between industry concentration contrast to the positive association predicted in H3.
and ethical climate and between decentralization and eth- Results of the third hierarchical step of the TOBIT re-
ical climate, were statistically significant. Plots of these gression analysis of serious violations indicated that six
638
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/VOl. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
Figure 1 Plots of First-order Interactions: Serious Violations organizational decentralization X ethical climate, pro-
A. Industrial Concentration (IC) x Ethical Climate (EC) vide evidence that stronger ethical climate attenuated
first-order interactions, thus supporting H llb and H 1g.
In addition, in all six plots, stronger ethical climate gen-
High
erally attenuated the main effects of motive and oppor-
tunity factors as implied by H lla through Hl le and
H1 lg.
.136
In contrast to these generally supportive findings, the
results of our hierarchical TOBIT analysis of nonserious
0)
violations, shown in Table 5, indicated that only the first
step produced statistically significant increases in explan-
.077
.045
Low EC
Low
High
Low
EC
.040
High
Industry Concentration
atory effect, and that this outcome could be attributed
directly to the industry control variable included in this
step of the analysis. For instances of nonserious corporate
illegality, then, none of our hypotheses are supported.
Discussion
In a hierarchical design such as ours, analysis at each step
incorporates as control factors all variables entered during
B. Org'l Decentralization (OD) x Ethical Climate (EC)
prior steps and establishes contingency conditions that
bound the effects of lower-order relationships. For these
reasons, it is often suggested that interpretation of ob-
served effects should focus primarily on the results of the
High
final hierarchical step that shows evidence of overall sta-
.128
Low EC
tistical significance (e.g., Cohen and Cohen 1983,
Kerlinger 1986). Not coincidentally, the final statistically
significant step in our analysis of serious violations con-
co
cerned the second-order interactions between motive, op-
a)
portunity, and choice covariates specified in our three-
.061
.055
way model of corporate illegality. Hence, we focus our
-
Low
Low
High
EC
.042
High
Org'l Decentralization
discussion on the six interactions shown in this step to be
statistically significant.
Considering first the zero-order relationships within
these interactions, we see in Table 6 that the main effects
of each of the seven covariates may be either positive or
negative, depending on the contingent effects of other
interacting variables. Industry profitability, organiza-
tional profitability, and ethical climate appear to have the
of the eight second-order interactions between motive,
opportunity, and choice factors were statistically signifi-
cant. As reported in Table 4, these interactions included hypothesized zero-order effects more often than not,
those between industry profitability, industry concentra- often as they support them, and industry concentration
tion, and ethical climate; organizational profitability, and organization size tend to form relationships with il-
structural complexity and decentralization form relation-
ships with illegality that oppose hypothesized effects as
industry concentration, and ethical climate; industry prof- legality opposite those predicted in our zero-order hy-
itability, organization size, and ethical climate; organi- potheses. In general, however, with the exception of or-
zational profitability, organization size, and ethical cli-
mate; industry profitability, structural complexity, and
ethical climate; and industry profitability, decentraliza- zero-order relationships between corporate illegality and
tion, and ethical climate. Plots of the six interactions, in- that our study does not provide evidence of the sort of
ganization size, no clear picture emerges of any of the
the seven covariates. This finding leads us to conclude
cluding the plots in Figure 2, indicate that two of the noncontingent zero-order effects necessary to accept Hi
interactions, organizational profitability x industry con- through H7 as unequivocal predictions of empirical ef-
centration X ethical climate and industry profitability x fects. In turn, this conclusion implies that the finding of
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/VOl. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
639MARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
Figure 2 Plots of Second-order Interactions: Serious Violations
E.
A. Industry Profitability (IP) x Industry Concentration (IC) x Ethical Climate
(EC) Industry
Profitability
(IP
Weak Ethical Climate Strong Ethical Climate
Weak Ethical Climate Strong Ethical Climate
High
High
.163
.147
2:1 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.136
.19
a\
.113
Low IC
Lowac
.013 High SC
.070
.044
Low
.046
Low
High
.043
High
IC
037
High
Low
IC
Low
.037 ~~~~~~.027
Low
High
Industry
B.
IC
Low
High
.036
1
Low
Low
High
SC
.034
High
Industry
Profitability
Organizational
.039
Profitabili
F. Industry Profitability (IP) x Org'l
Decentralization x
(OD) x Ethical
Climate (EC)
Profitability
(OP)
Industry
Weak Ethical Climate Strong Ethical Climate
Co
Weak Ethical Climate Strong Ethical Climate
.193
Low IC
High
High
.140
High CZ
ao
Low
a .074
.1
.102
IC
it
_
.080
.07
Low
High
IC High
IC
.028
.030
Low
High
Low
Low
.. 0 Low CZ
Low
Low
High
Organizational
CZ
High
.030
High
Low
CZ
.022
High
Organizational Profitability
Profitability
the first step of our analysis, namely, the unexpected posi-
C.
Industry
tive relationship between organizational profitability and
serious violations,
is a x
consequence
of higher-order con-
Profitability
(IP)
Organizational
Weak Ethical Climate Strong Ethical Climate
High
.113
=
08
.116
.0987 Low OS
High High OS
.037
Low
Low
.042
High
Low
Low
.032
High
Industry
D.
High OS
OS
is the possibility that the zero-order associations de-
scribed and assessed in previous research have failed to
Profitability
Organizational
capture the true etiology of serious corporate illegality.
First-order relationships
embedded
the six statisti-
Profitability
(OP)
x in
Organization
Weak Ethical Climate Strong Ethical Climate
cally significant second-order interactions are also subject
to contingency effects, as reported in Table 7, and are
High
therefore ambiguous. At this order of interaction, most
interpretive ambiguity grows out of disordinality, signi-
.135
Lo WOS
0)
_118High
High 05
~~~~~~~~.118
OS
Low
OS
fied in interaction plots by crossed lines. In the right-hand
plot in Figure 2A, for instance, the effects of high industry
profitability (in the presence of a strong ethical climate)
.0
Low .050 .060 .039gigh OS
Low
High
Low
High
Organizational
640
S
tingencies and thus fails to characterize fully the true ef-
fects. It also supports the more general suggestion that
the various zero-order effects discovered in prior research
on corporate illegality, which have differed markedly
from one study to another, probably originated in unex-
amined higher-order relationships. The implication is that
these higher-order relationships may well be the origin of
heretofore unexplained interstudy variation. Also implied
both depress and enhance the effects of industry concen-
tration because of the disordinal relationships between
on the one hand and
Profitability
low and high industry concentration
ORGANIZATION SCIENCENVOl. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
Table 6 Contingent Zero-order Effects in Second-order Interactions: Serious Violations
Hypothesized
Hypothesis Covariate Effect Supportive Contingencies Nonsupportive Contingencies
1 Industry Profitability Negative Low and high industry concentration High industry concentration with
with weak ethical climate strong ethical climate
Low industry concentration with Low structural complexity with weak
strong ethical climate ethical climate
Small and large organization size with
weak and strong ethical climate
High structural complexity with weak
ethical climate
Low and high structural complexity
with strong ethical climate
2 Organizational Profitability Negative High industry concentration with Low industry concentration with weak
weak and strong ethical climate and strong ethical climate
Large organization size with strong Small and large organization size with
ethical climate weak ethical climate
Low decentralization with weak Small organization size with strong
ethical climate ethical climate
Low and high decentralization with
strong ethical climate
3 Industry Concentration Positive High industry profitability with strong Low industry profitability with weak
ethical climate and strong ethical climate
Low organizational profitability with High industry profitability with weak
strong ethical climate ethical climate
Low organizational profitability with
weak ethical climate
High organizational profitability with
weak and strong ethical climate
4 Organization Size Positive Low and high industry profitability
with weak and strong ethical
climate
Low and high organizational
profitability with weak and strong
ethical climate
5 Structural Complexity Positive Low industry profitability with weak Low industry profitability with strong
ethical climate ethical climate
High industry profitability with strong High industry profitability with weak
ethical climate ethical climate
6 Organizational Positive Low and high industry profitability Low and high industry profitability
Decentralization with weak ethical climate with strong ethical climate
Table continues on following page.
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/VO1. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997 641
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
Table 6 Continued
Hypothesized
Hypothesis Covariate Effect Supportive Contingencies Nonsupportive Contingencies
7 Ethical Climate Negative Low industry profitability with low and High industry profitability with high
high industry concentration industry concentration
High industry profitability with low High organizational profitability with
industry concentration high industry concentration
Low organizational profitability with Low industry profitability with small
low and high industry organization size
concentration Low industry profitability with low
High organizational profitability with structural complexity
low industry concentration Low and high industry profitability
Low industry profitability with large with low organizational
organization size decentralization
High industry profitability with small
and large organization size
Low and high organizational
profitability with small and large
organization size
Low industry profitability with high
structural complexity
High industry profitability with low
and high structural complexity
Low and high industry profitability
with high organizational
decentralization
serious corporate illegality on the other. Disordinality of Second-order effects are considerably less vague be-
this sort characterizes nearly half of the first-order inter- cause, as indicated in Figure 2, in every instance of sta-
actions subsumed within the six statistically significant tistically significant interaction, ethical climate reduces
three-way relationships. Nevertheless, amid the ambigu- first-order associations between serious corporate
ity we can discern three general trends. First, interaction illegality and the relevant pairings of motive and oppor-
effects involving pairs of motive and opportunity covar- tunity covariates. These pairings are industry profitability
iates are at least as likely to be negative as positive under
the contingency conditions exerted by the second-order
factors examined, despite predictions of positive effects
in H8a through H8e and H8g. Second, first-order effects
involving pairs of motive and choice covariates are some-
what more likely to be negative than positive, in a manner
generally consistent with the directional predictions of
H9a and H9b. Third, interaction effects involving pairs
of opportunity and choice covariates are mostly negative
as predicted by HlOa through HIOd, although not always
so. These three trends provide support for our motive-
opportunity-choice model, primarily in the form of con-
tingent evidence of the kinds of choice-related interac-
and industry concentration, organizational profitability
and industry concentration, industry profitability and or-
ganization size (subject to the high level of illegality
found under conditions of low industry profitability, low
organization size, and strong ethical climate), and indus-
try profitability and structural complexity (subject to the
high level of illegality found under conditions of low in-
dustry profitability, low structural complexity, and strong
ethical climate). For instances of serious corporate ille-
gality, general support for our three-way model of motive,
opportunity, and choice is thus provided.
Subject to the fact that this support is qualified (due to
the detection of two statistically nonsignificant interac-
tions during second-order analyses), the results of our
tions predicted in relevant hypotheses of first-order study indicate that factors in and around organizations
effects, but also in a sense of boundedness due to the create a motive or tension to engage in serious illegal
failure to find evidence consistently supportive of our mo- activities. In concert with this motivation, additional fac-
tive X opportunity predictions. tors, again both internal and external, operate to create
642
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
Table 7 Contingent First-order Effects in Second-order Interactions: Serious Violations
Hypothesized
Hypothesis Covariate Effect Supportive Contingencies Nonsupportive Contingencies
8a Industry Profitability Positive High industry profitability with strong Weak ethical climate
Industry Concentration ethical climate Low industry profitability with strong
ethical climate
8b Organizational Profitability Positive Low organizational profitability with Weak ethical climate
Industry Concentration strong ethical climate High organizational profitability with
strong ethical climate
8c Industry Profitability Positive High industry profitability with strong Weak ethical climate
Organization Size ethical climate Low industry profitability with strong
ethical climate
8d Organizational Profitability Positive Low and high organizational
Organization
Size
profitability
with
weak
and
strong
ethical climate
8e Industry Profitability Positive Low industry profitability with weak Low industry profitability with strong
Structural Complexity ethical climate ethical climate
High industry profitability with strong High industry profitability with weak
ethical climate ethical climate
8g Industry Profitability Positive Weak ethical climate Strong ethical climate
Organizational Decentralization
9a Industry Profitability Negative Low industry concentration High industry concentration with high
Ethical Climate High industry concentration with low industry profitability
industry profitability Small organization size with low
Small organization size with high industry profitability
industry profitability Low structural complexity with low
Large organization size industry profitability
Low structural complexity with high Low decentralization
industry profitability
High structural complexity
High decentralization
9b Organizational Profitability Negative Low industry concentration High industry concentration with high
Ethical Climate High industry concentration with low organizational profitability
organizational profitability
Low and high organization size
10a Industry Concentration Negative Low industry profitability High industry profitability with high
Ethical Climate High industry profitability with low industry concentration
industry concentration High organizational profitability with
Low organizational profitability high industry concentration
High organizational profitability with
low industry concentration
10b Organizational Size Negative Low and high industry profitability
Ethical Climate Low and high organizational
profitability
lOc Structural Complexity Negative Low industry profitability with high Low industry profitability with low
Ethical Climate structural complexity structural complexity
High industry profitability
10d Organizational Negative Low and high industry profitability Low and high industry profitability
Decentralization with high decentralization with low decentralization
Ethical Climate
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/VOl. 8, NO. 6, November-December 1997 643
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
which they do business. In particular, the role of structural
the opportunity to engage in serious illegal activities. Fi-
nally, the ultimate effects of motive and oppoirtunity de- characteristics such as organization size, structural com-
pend on the shaping influence of choice. In this way, se- plexity, and organizational decentralization in influencing
rious corporate illegality is related to the interactive the incidence of serious corporate illegality might seem
to support the draconian suggestion that organizations
effects of motive, opportunity, and choice.
For nonserious violations, a considerably different pic-
found guilty of serious violations should be forced to en-
ture emerges. Neither the motive, nor the opportunity, nor gage in massive restructuring. In a similar vein, the ef-
the choice factors examined, considered individually or fects of industry characteristics, including profitability
collectively, have utility as predictors of nonserious, ad- and concentration, on serious illegality might contribute
ministrative actions. Apparently, in contrast to serious vi- to campaigns to sanction or control especially unlawful
olations, nonserious violations do not originate in the vo- industries. However, either of those actions would ignore
lition and intentions of violators, nor are they modified the finding that the effects of structural and industrial co-
by violators' concerns about possible detection, nor are variates can be moderated within organizations by ethical
they shaped by normative frameworks and sanctions (cf. interventions. A less severe action, and one that may be
Baucus 1994). Instead, membership in an industry char- just as effective, is to anticipate the effects of industrial
acterized by greater than average levels of illegality better and structural characteristics, and to establish strong eth-
predicts the frequency of successful administrative ical climates in organizations before those characteristics
charges brought against a firm. Speculation guided by the contribute to the emergence of serious illegality. Indeed,
institutional perspective on organizations (e.g., Meyer the noticeable effects of ethical climate in the first-order
and Rowan 1977, Meyer et al. 1981, Scott 1995) suggests and second-order interactions we investigated appear to
that this pattern might originate more in the behaviors and
refute the argument that developing ethical procedures in
interests of regulators than in the intentions and activities
organizations is a useless endeavor (Magnet 1986,
of regulated firms. Perhaps regulatory organizations with
Molander 1987). An ethical emphasis that incorporates
charters to administer environmental laws confront issues
codes, training, communication, and processes appears to
of self-legitimation on a regular basis, and must focus
be a feasible way of counterbalancing the effects of mo-
efforts and attention on providing justification for contin- tive and opportunity factors.
uation of their charters, funding, and so forth. For each Our results also have implications for researchers. Re-
such regulator, a potent source of justification is the rec- search on corporate illegality is still in its infancy, and
ord of successful administrative actions by its agents. much work remains to be done. With few exceptions
Such success might be secured most easily by pursuing
firms in industries with a record of prior convictions, as
both incriminating physical evidence and supportive pub-
lic perceptions would be readily obtainable. Administra-
tive actions also avoid the costs to the regulator of court
(e.g., Baucus and Near 1991, Clinard et al. 1979, Cochran
and Nigh 1987, Hill et al. 1992), major studies of ille-
gality have focused exclusively on antitrust violations and
unfair market practices. Until researchers begin to
broaden their analyses by investigating other types of il-
prosecution, making them the preferred alternative for all legality-labor law infractions, employment discrimina-
but the most publicly visible and flagrantly intentional
cases. It follows, then, that industry membership is in
tion, occupational safety violations, product liability, and
consumer fraud, to name but a few possibilities-we will
theory a significant predictor of a particular firm' s record
not know whether the concept of corporate illegality is
of nonserious violations due to institutional considera-
truly unitary, and therefore explainable by a single gen-
tions.
It is also possible, however, that our failure to find sta-
eral model, or a multidimensional construct requiring var-
ied explanations. The few studies assessing more than one
tistically significant relationships for nonserious illegality
violation type (Baucus and Near 1991, Clinard et al.
is a consequence of sample size limitations. Especially in
1979, Hill et al. 1992) have found generally common pre-
our assessments of first-order and second-order effects,
dictors across violation types, but have also uncovered
the 80 cases in our study afforded little in the way of
some variation in predictors for different violation cate-
statistical power, biasing our findings in the direction of gories. This variation provides sufficient reason to call
statistical nonsignificance. Whether an institutional ex-
for additional research on the dimensionality of corporate
planation or a statistical limitation underlies our results
illegality.
requires further investigation.
Our findings substantiate the importance of conducting
multivariable research on corporate illegality. Weighing
Implications
the evidence from our study and others suggests that cer-
Our results have important implications for managers of
contemporary organizations, and for the societies in
644
tain forms of illegality may be explained best in terms of
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
an intricate pattern of motive, opportunity, and choice.
Information obtained from case studies, interview anal-
yses, and the few large-sample quantitative analyses of
corporate illegality points to a variety of prospective
sources of either motive, opportunity, or choice. How-
ever, few studies have assessed combinations of these
source variables in multivariable models of illegality, and
ours is the first study to consolidate inquiry into the joint
influence of zero-order, first-order, and second-order ef-
fects. If research on organizations is to develop a
grounded theory of dysfunction, as called for by Pondy
and Mitroff (1979), our findings strongly suggest that it
will be multivariable in form.
Coleman, J. W. (1987), "Toward an Integrated Theory of White Collar
Crime," American Journal of Sociology, 93, 406-439.
Conklin, J. (1977), Illegal But Not Criminal, Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Crampton, S. M. and J. A. Wagner, III (1994), "Percept-Percept Infla-
tion in Microorganizational Research: An Investigation of Prev-
alence and Effect," Journal of Applied Psychology, 79, 67-76.
Dalton, D. and I. Kesner (1988), "On the Dynamics of Corporate Size
and Illegal Activity: An Empirical Assessment," Journal of Busi-
ness Ethics, 7, 861-870.
Donaldson, T. (1982), Corporations and Morality, Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Eckner, J. (1983), "Integrity Awareness Training for Managers," Train-
ing and Development Journal, 37, 46-49.
Ermann, M. and R. Lundman (1982a), "Corporate Violations of the
Acknowledgments
Corrupt Practices Act," in H. Edelhertz and T. Overcast (Eds.),
Data analyzed in this study were collected for the first author's doctoral White Collar Crime: An Agenda for Research, Lexington, MA:
dissertation. She thanks Richard Block, James Roper, and Dale Wilson Lexington Books.
for the helpful guidance they offered during the dissertation process.
and (1982b), Corporate Deviance, New York: Holt, Rine-
hart and Winston.
References
Asch, P. and J. Seneca (1976), "Is Collusion Profitable?" Review of
Economics and Statistics, 58, 1-12.
Baucus, M. S. (1994), "Pressure, Opportunity, and Predisposition: A
Multivariate Model of Corporate Illegality," Journal of Manage-
ment, 20, 699-721.
and J. P. Near (1991), "Can Illegal Corporate Behavior Be Pre-
dicted? An Event History Analysis," Academy of Management
Journal, 34, 9-36.
Braithwaite, J. (1985), "White Collar Crime," in R. Turner and J. Short
(Eds.), Annual Review of Sociology, Los Angeles, CA: Annual
Reviews, Inc.
Bromberg, W. (1965), Crime and the Mind: A Psychiatric Analysis of
Crime and Punishment, New York: Macmillan.
Buchholz, R. (1989), Fundamental Concepts and Problems in Business
Ethics, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Burton, J., Jr. (1966), "An Economic Analysis of Sherman Act Crim-
inal Cases," in J. Clabault and J. Burton, Jr. (Eds.), Sherman Act
Indictments 1955-1965: A Legal and Economic Analysis, New
York: Federal Legal Publications.
Byrne, J. A. (1995), "Informed Consent," Business Week, October 2,
Feinberg, S. and B. Serlen (1988), "The Crisis in Business Ethics,"
Corporate Accounting, 6, 36-39.
Finney, H. C. and H. R. Lesieur (1982), "A Contingency Theory of
Organizational Crime," in S. B. Bacharach (Ed.), Research in the
Sociology of Organizations: A Research Annual, Greenwich, CT:
JAI Press.
Geis, G. (1985), "Criminological Perspectives on Corporate Regula-
tion: A Review of Recent Research," in B. Fisse and P. French
(Eds.), Corrigible Corporations and Unruly Law, San Antonio,
TX: Trinity University Press.
Goddard, R. (1988), "Are You an Ethical Manager?" Personnel Jour-
nal, 67, 3, 38-47.
Gooding, R. Z. and J. A. Wagner, III (1985), "A Meta-Analytic Review
of the Relationship Between Size and Performance: The Produc-
tivity and Efficiency of Organizations and Their Subunits," Ad-
ministrative Science Quarterly, 30, 462-481.
Gross, W. and S. Shichman (1987), "How to Grow an Organizational
Culture," Personnel, 64, 52-56.
Hall, R. H. (1991), Organizations: Structure and Process, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Harr, J. (1995), A Civil Action, New York: Random House.
104-116.
Clinard, M. (1983), Corporate Ethics and Crime: The Role of Middle
Management, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
and P. Yeager (1980), Corporate Crimne, New York: Free Press.
, J. Brissette, K. Petrashek, and E. Harries (1979), Illegal
Corporate Behavior, Washington, DC: National Institute of Law
Enforcement and Criminal Justice.
Cochran, P. and D. Nigh (1987), "Illegal Corporate Behavior and the
Question of Moral Agency," in W. Frederick (Ed.), Research in
Hay, G. and D. Kelley (1974), "An Empirical Survey of Price Fixing
Conspiracies," Journal of Law and Economics, 19, 13-39.
Heide, J. B. and G. John (1990), "Alliances in Industrial Purchasing:
The Determinants of Joint Action in Buyer-Seller Relationships,"
Journal of Mar*eting Research, 27, 24-36.
Herling, J. (1962), The Great Price Conspiracy, Washington, DC:
Robert E. Luce, Inc.
Hill, C. W. L., P. C. Kelley, B. R. Agle, M. A. Hitt, and R. E. Hoskisson
Corporate Social Performance and Policy, Greenwich, CT: JAI (1992), "An Empirical Examination of the Causes of Corporate
Press. Wrongdoing in the United States," Human Relations, 45, 1055-
Cohen, A., A. Lindesmith, and K. Schuessler (1956), The Sutherland
Papers, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Cohen, J. and P. Cohen (1983), Applied Multiple Regression/Corre-
1076.
Industry Norms and Key Business Ratios (1983-1987), New York: Dun
& Bradstreet Credit Services.
lation Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, Hillsdale, NJ: Jackall, R. (1988), Moral Mazes, New York: Oxford University Press.
Lawrence Erlbaum. Kaplan, J. (1991), "The Corporate Sentencing Guidelines: Making
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
645MARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
Compliance Programs Effective," Corporate Conduct Quarterly,
1, 1-3.
Reiss, A. and A. Biderman (1980), Data Sources on White-CollarLaw-
Breaking, Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice.
Kerlinger, F. N. (1986), Foundations of Behavioral Research, 3d ed.,
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Kumar, N., L. W. Stem, and J. C. Anderson (1993), "Conducting In-
terorganizational Research Using Key Informants," Academy of
Management Journal, 36, 1633-1651.
Laczniak, G. (1983), "Business Ethics: A Manager's Primer," Business,
33, 1, 23-29.
Riedel, M. (1968), "Corporate Crime and Interfirm Organization: A
Study of Penalized Sherman Act Violations," Graduate Sociology
Club Journal, 8, 74-97.
Sanderson, G. and I. Vamer (1984), "What's Wrong with Corporate
Codes of Conduct?" Management Accounting, 66, 28-31.
Sathe, V. (1978), "Institutional Versus Questionnaire Measures of Or-
ganizational Structure," Academy of Management Journal, 21,
Lane, R. (1953), "Why Businessmen Violate the Law," Journal of
Criminal Law, Criminology, and Police Science, 44, 151-165.
Leonard, W. N. and M. G. Weber (1970), "Automakers and Dealers:
A Study of Criminogenic Market Forces," Law and Society Re-
view, 4, 407-424.
Maddala, G. (1982), Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in
Econometrics, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Magnet, M. (1986), "The Decline and Fall of Business Ethics," For-
tune, 114, 13, 65-72.
Mathews, M. (1987), "Codes of Ethics: Organizational Behavior and
Misbehavior," in W. Frederick (Ed.), Research in Corporate So-
cial Performance and Policy, Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Meyer, J. W. and B. Rowan (1977), "Institutionalized Organizations:
Formal Structure as Myth and Ceremony," American Journal of
Sociology, 83, 340-363.
, W. R. Scott, and T. E. Deal (1981), "Institutional and Technical
Sources of Organizational Structure: Explaining the Structure of
Educational Organizations," in H. D. Stein (Ed.), Organization
and Human Services, Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Molander, E. (1987), "A Paradigm for Design, Promulgation, and En-
forcement of Ethical Codes," Journal of Business Ethics, 6, 619-
227-238.
Schrager, L. and J. Short, Jr. (1978), "Toward a Sociology of Orga-
nizational Crime," Social Problems, 25, 407-419.
Scott, W. R. (1995), Institutions and Organizations, Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Seidler, J. (1974), "On Using Informants: A Technique for Collecting
Quantitative Data and Controlling Measurement Error in Orga-
nization Analysis," American Sociological Review, 39, 816-831.
Shover, N. (1978), "Defining Organizational Crime," in D. Ermann and
R. Lundman (Eds.), Corporate and Governmental Deviance, New
York: Oxford University Press.
Simpson, S. S. (1986), "The Decomposition of Antitrust: Testing a
Multi-Level, Longitudinal Model of Profit-Squeeze," American
Sociological Review, 51, 859-875.
Sonnenfeld, F. and P. Lawrence (1978), "Why Do Companies Suc-
cumb to Price Fixing?" Harvard Business Review, 56, 4, 145-
157.
Spelling, L. (1944), "Specific War Crimes," Journal of Criminal Law
and Criminology, 34, 303-3 10.
Spencer, J. (1965), "White Collar Crime," in E. Glover, H. Mannheim,
and E. Miller (Eds.), Criminology in Transition, London: Tavi-
631.
Moody's Industrial News Reports (1983-1987), New York: Moody's
stock.
Staw, B. M. and E. Szwajkowski (1975), "The Scarcity-Munificence
Investors Service.
Neter, J., W. Wasserman, and M. H. Kutner (1985), Applied Linear Component of Organizational Environments and the Commission
Statistical Models: Regression, Analysis of Variance, and Exper- of Illegal Acts," Administrative Science Quarterly, 20, 345-354.
imental Designs, Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Nocera, J. (1995), "Fatal Litigation," Fortune, October 16, 60-82.
Palmer, J. (1972), "Some Economic Conditions Conducive to Collu-
sion," Journal of Economic Inquiry, 6, 29-38.
Pennings, J. (1973), "Measures of Organizational Structure: A Meth-
odological Note," American Journal of Sociology, 79, 686-704.
Perez, J. (1978), "Corporate Criminality: A Study of One Thousand
Largest Industrial Corporations in the USA," unpublished doc-
toral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
Pondy, L. R. and I. I. Mitroff (1979), "Beyond Open System Models
of Organization," in B. M. Staw (Ed.), Research in Organiza-
tional Behavior, Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Posner, R. (1970), "A Statistical Study of Antitrust Enforcement,"
Journal of Law and Economics, 13, 365-420.
Price, J. L. and C. W. Mueller (1986), Handbook of Organizational
Measurement, Marshfield, MA: Pitman.
Provan, K. G. and S. J. Skinner (1989), "Interorganizational Depen-
dence and Control as Predictors of Opportunism in Dealer-
Supplier Relationships," Academy of Management Journal, 32,
sions of Organizational Structure," Administrative Science Quar-
646
New York: Random House.
Stone, C. D. (1975), Where the Law Ends: The Social Control of Cor-
porate Behavior, New York: Harper & Row.
Stone, E. F. and J. R. Hollenbeck (1989), "Clarifying Some Contro-
versial Issues Surrounding Statistical Procedures for Detecting
Moderator Variables: Empirical Evidence and Related Matters,"
Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 3-10.
Sutherland, E. (1949), White Collar Crime, New York: Dryden.
Szwajkowski, E. (1986), "The Myths and Realities of Research on
Organizational Misconduct," in W. Frederick (Ed.), Research in
Corporate Social Performance and Policy, Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press.
Thornburg, D. (1991), "Criminal Enforcement of Environmental Laws:
A National Priority," George Washington Law Review, 59, 778.
Ungar, S. J. (1972), "Get Away with What You Can," in R. L.
Heilbroner (Ed.), In the Name of Profit, New York: Doubleday.
Vandivier, K. (1972), "Why Should My Conscience Bother Me?" in
R. L. Heilbroner (Ed.), In the Name of Profit, New York: Dou-
202-212.
Pugh, D., D. Hickson, C. R. Hinings, and C. Turner (1968), "Dimen-
terly, 13, 65-105.
Steiner, G. and J. Steiner (1988), Business, Government, and Society,
bleday.
Vaughn, D. (1982), "Toward Understanding Unlawful Organizational
Behavior," Michigan Law Review, 80, 1377-1402.
ORGANIZATION SCIENCE/Vol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/termsMARIE A. MCKENDALL AND JOHN A. WAGNER, III Motive, Opportunity, Choice
(1983), Controlling Unlawful Organizational Behavior: Social
Structure and Corporate Misconduct, Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
and F. Bird (1987), "The Moral Dimensions of Organizational
Culture," Journal of Business Ethics, 6, 15-22.
Weller, S. (1988), "The Effectiveness of Corporate Codes of Ethics,"
Victor, B. and J. Cullen (1988), "The Organizational Bases of Eth-
ical Work Climates," Administrative Science Quarterly, 33,
101-125.
Journal of Business Ethics, 7, 389-396.
Yeager, P. (1981), "The Politics of Corporate Social Control: The Fed-
eral Response to Water Pollution," unpublished doctoral disser-
Ward's Business Directory of U.S. Private Comnpanies (1988), Bel-
mont, CA: Information Access Company.
Waters, J. (1978), "Catch 20.5: Corporate Morality as an Organiza-
tional Phenomenon," Organizational Dynamics, 6, 4, 3-19.
tation, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
(1986), "Analyzing Corporate Offenses," in W. Frederick (Ed.),
Research in Corporate Social Performance and Policy, Green-
wich, CT: JAI Press.
Accepted by Alan Meyer; received October 1994. This paper has been with the authors for two revisions.
ORGANIZATION SCIENCENVol. 8, No. 6, November-December 1997
This content downloaded from 78.201.239.33 on Thu, 25 Jan 2018 04:20:44 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
647