This article was downloaded by: [193.51.16.194] On: 24 January 2018, At: 05:25
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA
Organization Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
Radical Repertoires: The Incidence and Impact of
Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
Mary-Hunter McDonnell
To cite this article:
Mary-Hunter McDonnell (2016) Radical Repertoires: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism.
Organization Science 27(1):53-71. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2015.1017
Full terms and conditions of use: http://pubsonline.informs.org/page/terms-and-conditions
This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use
or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher
approval, unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.
The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or
support of claims made of that product, publication, or service.
Copyright © 2016, INFORMS
Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages
INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research, management
science, and analytics.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.orgOrganization Science
Vol. 27, No. 1, January–February 2016, pp. 53–71
ISSN 1047-7039 (print)  ISSN 1526-5455 (online)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2015.1017
© 2016 INFORMS
Radical Repertoires: The Incidence and Impact of
Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
Mary-Hunter McDonnell
The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, marymcd@wharton.upenn.edu
his article explores when and why firms participate in overt corporate-sponsored social activism. To shed light on this
question, I empirically explore the emergence and implications of a new strategic phenomenon in nonmarket strategy—
the corporate-sponsored boycott—in which firms voluntarily cooperate with contentious social movement organizations
to sponsor boycotts that protest the contested social practices of other companies or entities at higher orders of market
organization, such as industries, transnational regulators, or states. Using a longitudinal database that tracks the social
movement challenges faced by 300 large companies between 1993 and 2007, I provide evidence that overt corporate-
sponsored activism is used by companies that are chronically targeted and losing ground to activists, especially when those
companies are facing a reputational deficit. Furthermore, I find that participation in overt corporate-sponsored activism is
associated with significant decreases in the number of activist challenges targeting a firm in the future, suggesting that the
tactic may effectively defend a firm from contentious threat by allowing firms to co-opt allies within the activist population.
I discuss implications of these findings for social movement research, nonmarket strategy, and the study of corporate social
responsibility.
T
Keywords: social movements; corporate social responsibility; nonmarket strategy; political sociology
History: Published online in Articles in Advance November 11, 2015.
Introduction
Although researchers are increasingly noting the oc-
currence of corporate-sponsored activism, this class of
phenomenon remains theoretically anomalous. Corpor-
ate-sponsored activism is risky because firms taking a
stance on a contentious issue threaten to alienate stake-
holders who disagree. Moreover, as incumbent elites
in their social fields, firms wield power by virtue of
their entrenched social position, but lack the infor-
mal sources of power thought necessary for effective
grassroots mobilization, such as moral authenticity and
public trust (Selznick 1949, Walker 2015). When elite
actors like corporations do engage in movement-like
tactics, their stakeholders tend to mistrust their moti-
vations (Duffy et al. 2010, Yue 2015). Accordingly,
many social movement theories downplay the poten-
tial for firms or other elites to effectively participate in
the mobilization of collective action (e.g., Fligstein and
McAdam 2011, Gamson 1975, Tilly 1978; cf. McAdam
et al. 2005, McAdam and Boudet 2012). It remains an
intriguing question, therefore, why firms would resort
to this riskier component of the defensive performance
repertoire, or how they benefit by doing so. System-
atic empirical exploration of the phenomenon has been
largely precluded by the focus of prior work on covert
corporate activism, like “astroturfing,” which is by its
nature difficult to accurately observe (Lyon and Maxwell
2004, Walker 2014, Walker and Rea 2014). Pointing to
these persistent theoretical gaps, Walker and Rea (2014,
p. 294) recently called for research that does “more to
Challenges from social activists represent a considerable
strategic problem for targeted firms, as they threaten to
degrade sales, disrupt financial market performance, and
diminish valuable reputations. Recognizing this, scholars
have dedicated considerable energy to exploring the tac-
tics that firms use to defend themselves when targeted,
which McDonnell and King (2013) collectively refer to
as the “defensive performance repertoire.” Because firms
must juggle the economic expectations of their share-
holders with the normative expectations of broader con-
stituencies, they face the delicate task of responding to
social challenges in ways that protect their material well-
being without appearing to do so for purely economic
ends. Research suggests that firms most often man-
age this balance by employing tactics that allow them
to either avoid contentious interactions altogether or
dilute the salience of activists’ claims through strategic
impression management (Ingram et al. 2010, Rao et al.
2011, Yue et al. 2013, Elsbach 1994, Marchand 1998,
McDonnell and King 2013). However, firms do occa-
sionally face contentious issues head-on by directly par-
ticipating in social activist campaigns (e.g., Ingram and
Rao 2004; Lyon and Maxwell 2004; Walker 2009, 2010,
2012, 2014; Walker and Rea 2014). Examples include
corporate-sponsored protests, negative public relations
campaigns targeting activists, and mobilization of pro-
corporate grassroots campaigns (Aldrich 2010; Hillman
and Hitt 1999; Lyon and Maxwell 2004; Pring and
Canan 1996; Walker 2012, 2014).
53McDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
54
identify and elaborate [corporate-sponsored activism’s]
various incarnations 0 0 0 and further evaluate its efficacy.”
This paper seeks to answer this call through an
empirical analysis of an emergent, overt instantiation of
corporate-sponsored activism: the corporate-sponsored
boycott. Corporate-sponsored boycotts occur when firms
openly align with contentious social activists to protest
the problematic social practices of other companies,
industries, or states. For example, in 1993, Safeway
joined a Greenpeace-backed boycott of all Norwe-
gian seafood to protest the country’s commercial whal-
ing policies. In 2008, Wal-Mart collaborated with the
Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility (ICCR) to
orchestrate a boycott of Uzbek cotton, protesting the
employment of child laborers in the harvest (Birchall
2008). And in 2009, a consortium including Nike,
Harley Davidson, and Wal-Mart joined Greenpeace in
sponsoring a boycott of leather products obtained from
cattle grazed on de-forested areas of the Brazilian Ama-
zon, demanding that authorities take steps to forestall
the continued destruction of precious habitat.
This paper’s theoretical contribution stems from
its attention to two questions. First, does corporate-
sponsored activism reduce the likelihood that firms will
be targeted by contentious challenges, and, if so, how?
Second, under what circumstances are firms likely to
resort to these relatively radical tactics? To answer these
questions, I employ a quantitative empirical examina-
tion of a unique longitudinal database that tracks activist
interactions among a sample of 300 elite U.S. firms
over a 15-year period, 1993 to 2007. These quantita-
tive data are supplemented with archival and qualitative
data, including analysis of the media coverage of past
corporate-sponsored boycotts and interviews with exec-
utives of participating firms and activist organizations.
Ultimately, I find evidence that overt corporate-
sponsored activism is a tactic of last resort. The tactic
is used by companies that are being targeted heavily
by contention and chronically losing ground to activists,
especially when those companies are facing a reputa-
tional deficit. Furthermore, I find that firms participating
in overt corporate-sponsored activism enjoy significant
decreases in the number of contentious challenges tar-
geting them in the future, suggesting that the tactic may
effectively defend a firm from contentious threat. Quali-
tative evidence from my interviews with corporate insid-
ers suggests that this is due to the tactic’s usefulness
in co-opting allies within the population of contentious
activists who, in addition to becoming themselves less
likely to target the firm, will also work to dissuade other
activists in their network from targeting the firm.
Background: Market Contention and the
Defensive Performance Repertoire
Historically, social activists contested problematic cor-
porate behaviors by targeting the state, seeking to force
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
industry reform through formal regulation. But as the
perceived political power, resources, and global reach
of corporations eclipses that of traditional government
agencies, activists have increasingly targeted corpora-
tions directly (Soule 2009, Seidman 2007). As expressed
by the former head of Greenpeace, referring to his
organization’s 2001 campaign against Exxon Mobil in
retaliation to its recalcitrant position regarding climate
change:
The smart activists are now saying, “O.K., you want to
play markets—let’s play.’’ They don’t waste time throw-
ing stones or lobbying the government. That takes for-
ever and can easily be counter-lobbied by corporations.
No, no, no. They start with consumers at the pump, get
them to pressure the gas stations, get the station owners
to pressure the companies and the companies to pressure
governments. (Friedman 2001)
Contention threatens to harm its targets in multiple
ways. It can diminish corporate profits by disrupting the
target’s strategic routines and altering consumer choices
(Seidman 2007, Friedman 1985, Luders 2006). It can
threaten a firm’s market performance by increasing per-
ceptions of financial and environmental risk (King and
Soule 2007, Vasi and King 2012). It can disrupt a firm’s
ability to access and influence critical nonmarket stake-
holders like politicians and regulatory agents (Hiatt and
Park 2013, McDonnell and Werner 2015). And it can
tarnish a firm’s public image by disseminating vilifying
claims in the media (King 2008, McDonnell and King
2013).
Given these myriad sources of disruptive threat, con-
tentious activist challenges can present a formidable
strategic problem for chronically targeted organizations,
prompting scholars to explore the strategies that targeted
organizations use to defend themselves. Firms’ first line
of defense against contentious challenges is the use of
evasive tactics that seek to dodge contentious interaction
entirely. For example, Ingram et al. (2010) provide evi-
dence that Wal-Mart holds town hall meetings before it
enters new communities to “test for protest.” When these
initial meetings are met with contentious protesters, Wal-
mart is more likely to abandon its plans to open a new
store in the community. Yue et al. (2013) show that
Target similarly interprets protests against Wal-Mart as
signals about which communities to avoid, particularly
when the protestors took issue with the general organiza-
tional form of box stores, rather than Wal-Mart’s specific
behaviors. Firms may also engage in evasive strategies
by selectively locating in regions where the formal insti-
tutional structure provides them with an advantage over
challengers. For example, Rao et al. (2011) find that
Wal-Mart systematically prefers locating new stores on
the borders of states with antiunion right-to-work laws.
Finally, when an emerging challenger movement can be
anticipated and its request is not prohibitively costly,
firms may choose to proactively amend their practicesMcDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
to negate the necessity of a challenge before it occurs
(Baron and Diermeier 2007).
Firms that cannot evade activist challenges are still
often able to defend themselves without direct engage-
ment by using diversionary tactics that work to bolster
the firms’ prosocial image among key constituencies.
These include, for example, impression management
strategies that decrease the salience of activist chal-
lenges without directly acknowledging them (Elsbach
1994, Marchand 1998). For example, McDonnell and
King (2013) provide evidence that firms targeted by
social movement boycotts react by increasing the num-
ber of prosocial claims—claims touting their involve-
ment in charitable endeavors—disseminated through
press releases. Ingram et al. (2010) provide comple-
mentary evidence that when Wal-Mart faces contention
in especially promising new markets, it makes strategic
charitable donations to local community organizations
upon entry to promote goodwill.
Corporate-sponsored activism—the third category of
defensive performances—occurs when firms directly
participate in contentious politics. Academic work on
the subject has been largely focused on covert instantia-
tions. For example, Walker (2014) finds that companies
facing particularly intractable challenger campaigns will
not infrequently organize vying procorporate grassroots
campaigns to shore up stakeholder support. Firms engag-
ing in this strategy typically use the help of professional
public relations consulting agencies: Walker (2014)
reports that almost 40% of the Fortune 500 appeared on
the client lists of grassroots public affairs consultants by
2010. In practice, covert corporate-sponsored activism,
or “astroturfing,” typically takes one of two forms. First,
consulting agencies may selectively encourage targeted
individuals to voice their opinions to create a false
appearance of a public consensus aligned with the inter-
ests of the corporate client. For example, a recent study
of responses to the Chicago Department of Health’s
Twitter campaign calling for enhanced regulation of e-
cigarettes found that nearly 14% of the tweets opposing
the regulation appeared to be astroturfing, with “four of
the five central retweet network members [being] affil-
iated with e-cigarette businesses or advocacy groups”
(Harris et al. 2014). Second, firms may set up shell
organizations that promote the firm’s agenda through
the simulacrum of an unaffiliated social movement orga-
nization. Evidence of this exists in the net neutrality
debate, where a number of newly minted organizations
that oppose net neutrality—groups like Onward Inter-
net and Broadband for America—have been linked to
the National Cable and Telecom Association, the trade
group representing many of telecom’s most powerful
incumbents (Cox 2014, Fang 2014).
Though overt corporate-sponsored activism has
received less academic attention, examples of open
corporate participation in contentious movements also
55
abound. Firms engaging in overt corporate-sponsored
activism adopt the tactics of insurgency, such as let-
ter writing campaigns or issue advertising, to openly
advocate for a particular social movement’s cause. For
example, a wave of corporate issue advertising in support
of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT)
movement was recently sparked after the Supreme
Court struck down the Defense of Marriage Act and
California’s Proposition 8 in 2013. Over 20 prominent
companies, including Apple, Google, Cisco, Nike,
Microsoft, and Mastercard issued pro-LGBT messages
via advertisements, press releases, or social media
(Huffington Post 2013). Firms also participate in con-
tentious tactics like protests and boycotts. In the present
study, my archival media analysis of 300 randomly
selected members of the Fortune 500 from 1993 to 2007
uncovered 74 examples of corporate-sponsored boycotts,
wherein firms partnered with large nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) to sponsor boycotts of other firms,
industries, or countries to protest problematic issues or
practices. By 2007, over 14% of the sample members
had sponsored at least one boycott.
Importantly, the repertoire of overt corporate-
sponsored activism is inherently riskier than evasive,
diversionary, or covert tactics for two primary reasons.
First, any time firms take a public stance on a contentious
issue, they risk alienating—and even mobilizing—
stakeholders who disagree. Accordingly, firms must be
selective about the types of initiatives that they support,
favoring collaborations with campaigns whose values
are aligned with those of the firm’s core stakeholders.
For example, Sears joined with victims’ rights groups in
2000 to boycott the Italian clothier Benetton for its “We,
On Death Row” ad campaign, which sympathetically
portrayed death row inmates. Given that the death
penalty is one of the more polarizing contemporary
political issues, taking a clear pro-death penalty stance
was certainly risky. But Sears tempered this risk by
gauging its consumers’ sentiment on the issue prior to
announcing its decision to cancel its line of Benetton
products. As its public relations director remarked,
“We’ve had customers who have written to us indicating
that they will never buy from Sears again because we
are selling Benetton merchandise. Some of the e-mails
we’ve received and some of the letters are from people
who have lost loved ones to murder. And they’re very
upset” (Feeney 2000).
Second, firms’ engagement in contentious politics
may appear insincere or inauthentic. As elite actors
within the field, firms “lack one of the few (but cen-
tral) advantages that insurgents traditionally enjoy: the
appearance of speaking for the authentic interests of
‘the people’ in a fashion not motivated primarily by
gaining economic resources or political power” (Walker
2015, p. 3). External stakeholders are likely to be dubi-
ous of a firm’s motives for engaging in corporate-
sponsored activism, given that people tend to perceiveMcDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
56
large elite firms and their representatives as lacking in
moral authenticity and, unlike large social movement
organizations, as not having the public’s interest at heart
(Selznick 1949, Yue 2015). Take, for example, a 2004
campaign in which a group of retailers including Nord-
strom, H&M, and Abercrombie and Fitch partnered with
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)
to sponsor a boycott of the Australian wool industry,
demanding the adoption of more humane sheep-shearing
practices. Stakeholders could easily be skeptical about
the consortium’s true motives. Why would these com-
panies care about the welfare of sheep? Is this action
really a poorly veiled maneuver to wriggle out of exist-
ing contracts or induce more favorable terms with wool
suppliers? Given the baseline assumption that corporate
strategies are driven by the bottom line, it may be diffi-
cult for firms to muster the moral legitimacy needed to
effectively mobilize support for a social initiative.
Firms engaging in overt corporate-sponsored activism
typically mitigate this latter risk by working in collab-
oration with established NGOs and social movement
organizations. Through such collaborations, firms may
be able to borrow from the superior social legitimacy
of these organizations (Yaziji and Doh 2009). NGOs’
primary mission relates to a social cause, rather than
profits, so they are generally perceived as more trustwor-
thy than private corporations. Thus, the participation of
NGOs may endow a corporate-sponsored initiative with
authenticity, increasing the likelihood that participating
firms are perceived to be driven by prosocial motives,
rather than economic self-interest.
Hypotheses
How Does Corporate-Sponsored Activism Alleviate
Contention Within a Firm’s Social Environment?
Firms draw upon the tactics comprising their defen-
sive performance repertoire to respond to and quell
disruptive contention within their social environments
(McDonnell and King 2013). Evasive tactics work to
proactively address contention by avoiding it entirely.
Diversionary tactics work to buffer the firm from the
harmful effects of contention by distracting audience
members with claims of the firm’s prosocial orientation
that dilute, rather than necessarily refute, the disparaging
claims made by challengers. The repertoire of corporate-
sponsored activism differs from these other tactics inso-
far as it requires firms to directly acknowledge and
actively participate in contentious politics. The precise
mechanism through which corporate-sponsored activism
works to ameliorate contention within a firm’s environ-
ment changes depending on whether the firm engages in
covert or overt forms of the tactic.
In cases of covert corporate-sponsored activism, tar-
geted companies actively vie against a challenger move-
ment for institutional support, working to mobilize or
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
invigorate a countermovement that is aligned with the
company’s own vested interests (Walker 2014). Coun-
termovement opposition is a common response to a
social movement’s early success, as elites whose pre-
rogatives are threatened act to defend the established
institutional order (Zald and McCarthy 1980, Meyer
and Staggenborg 1996). In fact, according to Zald and
Useem (1987, pp. 247–248), “movements of any vis-
ibility and impact create the conditions for the mobi-
lization of countermovements. By advocating change, by
attacking the established interests, [and] by mobilizing
symbols and raising costs to others.0 0 0” As challenger
movements work to problematize corporate practices and
turn stakeholders against targeted firms, firms participate
in counter-movements that lobby for the continued sup-
port of critical stakeholders (Zald and Useem 1987). In
this way, covert corporate-sponsored activism endeav-
ors to temper contentious interactions by curbing the
momentum of threatening movements.
My research into corporate-sponsored boycotts as an
example of overt corporate-sponsored social activism
indicates that the tactic works to reduce contention
within a firm’s social environment by directly or indi-
rectly co-opting contentious stakeholders through strate-
gic social alliances. Firms that openly support social
movement campaigns form selective social alliances
with the social movement organizations and NGOs also
engaged in the movement. Through such alliances, firms
build social capital with potentially hostile activists,
which reduces the likelihood that they will be con-
tentiously targeted in the future. As an executive of a
participating firm remarked in one of my interviews:
Corporations have now gotten much more sophisticated
about NGOs. [We] are thinking, “Well who can we
make nice with—build enough social capital and enough
networks—so that when the rocks get hurled, they’ll be
hurled at someone else and not us.’’
In his seminal study of the Tennessee Valley Author-
ity, Selznick (1949) defined co-optation as a self-defense
mechanism used by an organization to manage uncer-
tain or unstable environmental elements by absorbing
them into its decision-making structure, where they can
be more easily controlled (see also Pfeffer and Salancik
1978). Building on Selznick’s (1949) early work, social
network theorists have additionally suggested that firms
use social networks to co-opt broader constituencies that
remain outside of the firm, as when firms exercise social
influence through board interlocks (Mizruchi 1996). In
the present setting, I define co-optation in a slightly
broader way, as occurring when an organization seeks to
manage an external threat by establishing a formal rela-
tionship or alliance that to some extent internalizes the
threat and makes it more predictable. This co-optation
can be either direct or indirect.
Direct co-optation occurs where a firm forms a rela-
tionship with the same entity that it perceives to be anMcDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
immediate threat. Firms seek direct co-optation through
corporate-sponsored activism when they openly support
the campaign of a potentially hostile activist group. In
the case of corporate-sponsored boycotts, this occurs
when firms collaborate with an activist NGO’s initia-
tive to avoid being targeted themselves. Activist NGOs
often approach firms prior to targeting them to give them
the opportunity to proactively comply with the initia-
tive. Such precontention partnerships can be beneficial
for both the activist organization and the sponsoring
firm. Research in consumer behavior suggests that con-
sumers are much more likely to participate in a boy-
cott when there is a readily available substitute for the
protested product (Sen et al. 2001). Thus, activist groups
are incentivized to favorably tout firms that collaborate
with their boycotts, in addition to vilifying those that
do not. For example, in 1993, Safeway backed a Green-
peace boycott of Norwegian seafood to protest the coun-
try’s permissive stance toward commercial whaling. The
grocer cancelled over four million dollars’ worth of con-
tracts with Norwegian seafood suppliers upon joining
the boycott (Agence France-Presse 1993). Not only did
Greenpeace set up pickets at rival grocers that continued
to import Norwegian seafood, but they also actively pro-
moted Safeway, “asking shoppers to support whales by
switching supermarkets” (Agence France-Presse 1993).
In its more contemporary boycott initiatives, Greenpeace
continues to promote its corporate sponsors in addi-
tion to vitiating offenders. In 2009, for example, when
Nike signed on to its boycott of leather sourced from
deforested areas of the Brazilian Amazon, Greenpeace
issued a widely published press release lauding Nike’s
“bold step” (Morales 2009). Unlike its competitors Adi-
das, Reebok, and Clarks, says a Greenpeace campaigner,
“Nike has recognized that trampling over the Ama-
zon rainforest to produce leather for its trainers is an
unacceptable way of doing business” (Morales 2009).
Activists that promote their corporate allies make it eas-
ier for consumers to comply with their boycott by pro-
viding them with readily available alternatives. And in
the process, corporate sponsors win positive differenti-
ation from their competitors, in addition to forging an
alliance with what otherwise would have been a con-
tentious challenger.
Indirect co-optation occurs when firms use social net-
works to establish relationships with entities that are not
directly threatening, but that can influence threatening
entities. In the corporate-sponsored activism setting, this
occurs when firms sponsor the campaigns of prominent
NGOs so that these allies will discourage other NGOs
from contentiously targeting the firm in the future.
I interviewed one executive of a large retailer who
had experience on multiple corporate-sponsored activist
campaigns and described this mechanism at work:
[Work with one NGO translates to goodwill among oth-
ers] because it’s a smaller world than you might imag-
ine among the big NGOs. So, the Greenpeace guys, they
57
know the PETA guys, and so on. And so if we are work-
ing with PETA on something that might make a big dif-
ference in the animal rights world, and then, if we get
a call from Greenpeace threatening to put the heat on
us 0 0 0 we’d expect PETA to call and say “back off, they
are one of the good guys.’’
Through either the direct or indirect co-optation of
challengers within their environment, overt corporate
sponsorship of contentious social movement campaigns
is likely to have the consequence of decreasing the like-
lihood that a firm will be targeted by contentious chal-
lengers in the future.
Hypothesis 1 (H1). Corporate-sponsored activism
will be associated with decreased contentious challenges.
Under What Circumstances Do Firms Participate in
Corporate-Sponsored Activism?
As suggested above, evasive and diversionary tac-
tics comprise firms’ preferred categories of defensive
responses to contentious challenges. If companies could
evade a controversy altogether or quell a contentious
challenge with impression management, then they would
do just that. There are, however, periods in which
evasive strategies have failed and impression manage-
ment is not enough to forestall destabilizing contention
within a company’s social environment. It is in these
situations that firms are likely to resort to the more
radical performances in their defensive repertoire. As
Walker (2015, p. 3) propones, “[w]hen seriously threat-
ened during moments of field uncertainty or crisis, elite
actors 0 0 0 may perceive the need to adopt the strategies
of insurgent actors, and to do so in a way that does not
backfire on their attempts to secure audience judgments
of their trustworthiness and legitimacy.”
Companies are likely to employ corporate-sponsored
activism when they are facing extreme levels of disrup-
tive contention. Past research has found that corporate
social behaviors and public relations activity more gen-
erally are spurred by social instability (Meznar and Nigh
1995). Social movement theory suggests that activists
use contentious tactics to foster and promote social
instability, problematizing institutionalized practices by
reframing them as antinormative (Benford and Snow
2000, Maguire and Hardy 2009). When activists are suc-
cessful at reframing the public’s perception of an issue,
their efforts can spur deinstitutionalization of the sta-
tus quo, inviting radical institutional change in the form
of new institutional logics and competing organizational
forms (Rao et al. 2000, 2003; Hiatt et al. 2009; Sine
and Lee 2009). For this reason, chronic activist chal-
lenges represent strong signals of environmental uncer-
tainty and heightened risk (King and Soule 2007, Vasi
and King 2012). Given that elite firms have their inter-
ests and power heavily vested in the status quo, they are
highly motivated to forestall any potential deinstitution-
alization. They thus expand their defensive performanceMcDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
58
repertoire during periods of chronic contention, turning
to more innovative and behaviorally significant defen-
sive tactics (McDonnell et al. 2015). Given that radical
defensive performances are inherently risky, as discussed
above, firms are unlikely to turn to them unless facing
periods of exaggerated contention.
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
these past studies suggest that concessions represent a
workable proxy for the extent to which corporate actors
perceive activism as threatening. 1 This leads to the fol-
lowing hypothesis:
Hypothesis 2A (H2A). As the number of contentious
challenges targeting a firm increases, the firm will be
more likely to engage in corporate-sponsored activism. Hypothesis 2B (H2B). Contentious challenges that
are successful in eliciting a concession should be
more likely to lead companies to engage in corporate-
sponsored activism than those that are unsuccessful in
eliciting a concession.
Of course, not all activism is likely to have an equal
effect on corporate behavior. Social movements vary in
terms of their salience and ability to effectively mobi-
lize. The likelihood that they will spur defensive per-
formances from their targets depends on whether the
targets attend to the movement and perceive it as threat-
ening. Prior research in anticorporate activism suggests
that firms are more likely to respond to an activist attack
that presents a viable threat to their public image and
position within their social field (King 2008, McDonnell
and King 2013). In line with this work, I suggest that
the mechanism through which contention prompts firms
to engage in corporate-sponsored activism is perceived
activist threat. The likelihood that firms will attempt to
co-opt an uncertain environmental force depends on the
extent to which the firm finds the force destabilizing
or threatening. When activist challenges appear partic-
ularly threatening or destabilizing, firms are likely to
seek out activist campaigns in an effort to co-opt con-
tentious stakeholders within their environment through
social alliances, thereby turning a nonmarket vulnerabil-
ity into a strength.
Prior research suggests that firms that are more likely
to concede to activist challenges that they perceive as
posing a viable threat to their public image or reputa-
tion. For example, empirical examinations of corporate
responses to boycotts repeatedly find that concession is
more likely when the challenge receives more media
attention demonstrating its salience and public appeal
(King 2008, McDonnell and King 2013). King (2008)
also finds that concession is more likely when a move-
ment targets a company made vulnerable by recent rep-
utational declines. He concludes that “the most critical
mechanism underlying boycotts’ influence is their ability
to damage corporate reputations” (King 2008, p. 413).
A study by Eesley and Lenox (2006) empirically exam-
ines firm responses to over 600 requests from environ-
mental activists, including contentious tactics like boy-
cotts and protests. They find that positive firm responses
are highly correlative with the perceived legitimacy of
the activist and the advocated issue, as well as the chal-
lenger’s power relative to the targeted firm (in terms of
total assets). Insofar as activist challenges are likely to
be perceived as more threatening when targets are more
vulnerable to reputational damage or when challengers
are more powerful and attract more media attention, Firms facing particularly contentious environments are
also more likely to perceive contention as threatening
when they have poor reputations, defined as the level
of general public approval of the firm. This is because
a firm’s current reputation can affect how stakeholders
interpret and respond to challenges levied at the orga-
nization; namely, when faced with possible evidence of
a firm’s antisocial behavior, stakeholders are likely to
afford reputable firms the benefit of the doubt (Fombrun
1996). This creates a “halo effect” for elite, reputable
organizations, which makes them more resilient in the
face of an image threat (Bromley 1993, Fombrun 1996,
Pfarrer et al. 2010, McDonnell and King 2015). For
example, past work has found that the media is less
likely to criticize a reputable organization when it is
involved in a scandal or reputational crisis (Balzer and
Sulsky 1992, Coombs 1999). Thus, reputations represent
critical resources that enable firms to ride out a crisis
situation (Dowling 2002).
Past work provides evidence that the halo effect
plays a role in firm responses to social activist chal-
lenges. King (2008), for example, finds that firms are
more likely to concede to boycotts when their pub-
lic image is vulnerable. Because of the enhanced ben-
efit of the doubt they enjoy, reputable firms may be
more successful in pacifying a contentious challenge
through impression management alone, without need-
ing to resort to more radical tactics. This could explain
McDonnell and King’s (2013) finding that reputable
firms are more likely to respond to activism with
increased charitable work in domains that are unrelated
to the activists’ challenge. Stakeholders are likely to be
dubious of the impression management efforts of less
reputable firms, such that these firms may have to resort
to more radical tactics to quell a contentious threat.
Walker (2014) offers indirect evidence of this in his
analysis of the client lists of the public relations consul-
tants commonly employed to effectuate covert corporate-
sponsored activism. Specifically, he found that firms
with lower reputations were more likely than their more
reputable peers to hire these consultants in response to
contentious challenges. He surmised that “firms with
a strong reputation can weather negative information
without needing to engage in campaigns to mobilize
stakeholders 0 0 0 [suggesting that] reputation operates as aMcDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
buffer against negative information in firms’ institutional
environments” (Walker 2014, p. 126).
Additionally, whereas a reputable firm can rest on
its laurels when it faces a period of enhanced social
scrutiny, less reputable firms may need to seek out
overt alliances with NGOs to borrow from the NGOs’
enhanced social legitimacy. This idea is supported by
prior work on cross-sector alliances, which suggests
that firms seek out collaborations with NGOs to gain
legitimacy and improve their public image when facing
turbulent institutional environments (Selsky and Parker
2005). The literature on strategic alliances suggests
that alliances occur when organizations possess resource
complementarities, including social resources like legiti-
macy (Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven 1996). Hence, firms
that are facing a legitimacy deficit in their social perfor-
mance are also those likely to benefit most from allying
themselves with organizations perceived as authentically
prosocial, such as NGOs. For these reasons, firms pos-
sessing lower social approval will be more likely to
respond to contention by participating in overt corporate-
sponsored activism.
Hypothesis 3 (H3). A firm’s public approval will
negatively moderate the relationships proposed in H2A
and H2B.
Data and Methods
Sample Selection and Data Construction
This study uses an event history design to examine
the incidence and effects of corporate-sponsored boy-
cotts, as a contemporary instantiation of overt corporate-
sponsored activism. To create the sample used in this
study, I began by creating a list of all companies that
appeared in the Fortune 500 during the 15-year inter-
val covered in the study, 1993–2007. I chose to draw
my sample from the Fortune 500 because prior research
suggests that social movements tend to interact most
often with the largest, highest-status firms in an indus-
try (e.g., King 2008, King and McDonnell 2015). To
avoid any left censoring of the panel, I limited the sam-
ple to firms that were publically listed prior to 1991.
From the resulting list, I randomly selected 300 com-
panies. I tracked each of these companies from 1993 to
2007, creating a panel data set with a firm-year unit of
analysis. Some companies in the sample dropped out of
the panel because they ceased to operate as independent
public companies prior to 2007; all spells ending prior to
2007 are treated as right censored at that point. A total
of 174 firm-year observations were omitted due to the
company ceasing to operate as an independent company
or due to missing financial data in Compustat. This led
to a total sample of 4,326 company-year observations.
I chose to begin my panel in 1993 because the first
instance of a corporate-sponsored boycott that I located
59
occurred in 1993, when Safeway joined the Greenpeace
boycott of Norwegian seafood. In addition to this being
the earliest example of the tactic that I located in my
search of newspaper articles (which extended to 1989),
the article mentioning this boycott also suggests that
the tactic is just emerging, as a Greenpeace spokesman
provides that the organization’s partnership with a com-
pany “marks a significant change in campaign strategy.”
(Agence France-Presse 1993). Therefore, 1993 seems a
fitting proxy for the tactic’s initial use.
Dependent Variables
The dependent variable used to test H1—total con-
tentious challenges—was collected using an archival
media search of Factiva’s Major News and Press Release
Wires database. Six independent coders searched for
each sampled company’s name in Factiva along with
the string (boycott or boycotts or boycotting or boy-
cotted) and read each result, selecting any articles where
the company was named as a target of a boycott. Prior
studies of boycotts have utilized a similar method of
identifying boycotts through the content analysis of
newspaper articles (e.g., Pruitt and Friedman 1986, King
2008, McDonnell and King 2013). Any article about a
boycott was then coded through a content analysis to
determine (i) when the boycott occurred, (ii) what issue
was being protested, (iii) what group was calling for the
boycott, (iv) what other contentious tactics were being
used in conjunction with the boycott, and (v) whether
the boycott ended in a concession. In total, coders identi-
fied 439 articles announcing activist challenges targeting
firms in my sample between 1993 and 2007. These ref-
erenced a total of 210 unique boycotts, averaging a total
of 2.09 articles apiece. Forty-seven of the boycotts, or
22.4%, ended in a concession. This success rate is sim-
ilar to the 25% concession rate found in King’s (2008)
separate sample of U.S. consumer boycotts reported in
the five largest media outlets between 1990 and 2005.
I chose to concentrate on boycotts as a proxy for
external activism because they are easily identifiable in
media coverage (unlike protests or demonstrations, for
which media searches produce many false positives),
and because boycotts are one of the most common
and effective contentious tactics used by anticorporate
activists (Seidman 2007, King 2008). Although anticor-
porate activists may also use other tactics like protests,
lawsuits, or corporate smear campaigns, it is rare that
a significant movement does not also employ a con-
sumer boycott. Additionally, successful boycotts most
often end in public corporate concessions (King 2008),
which makes the success or failure of a boycott cam-
paign easier to identify than is the case for other forms
of extrainstitutional protest.
The dependent variable used to test Hypotheses 2A,
2B, and 3—sponsoring a social movement boycott—was
collected using a search of Factiva’s Major News andMcDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
60
Press Release Wires database. Six independent coders
searched for each company’s name along with the string:
boycott or boycotts or boycotting or boycotted. The
coders read through each of the results (over 100,000
articles in total) and pulled results in which a com-
pany was cited as voluntarily joining or initiating a
social movement boycott without having been first tar-
geted by the movement. This process ultimately iden-
tified 74 corporate-sponsored boycotts that my sample
members participated in over the 15-year period. These
corporate-sponsored boycotts address a wide range of
social issues, including environmental issues (22%),
moral or religious issues (22%), animal rights issues
(15%), civil rights or diversity issues (11%), and human
or labor rights issues (8%). Forty-three unique compa-
nies, or just over 14% of all companies in the sample,
sponsored at least one boycott. By the end of the panel,
28 firms had used the tactic only once, 10 firms had used
the tactic twice, and 5 firms had used the tactic three or
more times (with a maximum of eight uses). To capture
the incidence of a corporate-sponsored boycott across
the panel, I employ a binary variable that is coded as
1 if a company sponsored at least one social movement
boycott in a given year 2 and as 0 if it did not. 3
Independent Variables
To test H1, the independent variable is a one-year lagged
version of the Corporate-Sponsored Boycott variable, as
described above. 4 The independent variable used to test
H2A is the one-year lagged Total Contentious Chal-
lenges variable, described above. In models parsing suc-
cessful and unsuccessful activist challenges to test H2B,
Successful Contentious Challenges is a count variable
indicating the total number of boycotts in the prior year
in which activists were able to successfully coerce a con-
cession from the targeted company. Unsuccessful Con-
tentious Challenges is a count of the number of boycotts
in the prior year in which activists were unable to suc-
cessfully elicit a concession. 5
To test H3, I operationalize Public Approval using a
content analysis of all articles published about the firm
each year in USA Today, obtained via LexisNexis. I used
USA Today because it is the publication with the widest
readership in the United States and it tends to publish
general interest and character pieces about businesses,
which are likely to convey the emotional valence of
the general public’s attitude toward each firm (Rindova
et al. 2006). Research assistants read each article men-
tioning a sampled firm to exclude articles in which the
company was not the primary focus, as well as stock
reports and false positives. I then analyzed the affective
valence of each article using the Linguistic Inquiry Word
Count (LIWC) program, which is a popular tool for
assessing firm’s general public approval (Pfarrer et al.
2010). The LIWC employs a dictionary of over 900
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
affectively valenced words to provide summary statis-
tics of the extent of positively and negatively valenced
emotional words within each article (see http://liwc.net
for additional information on the software and its dic-
tionaries). I separately analyzed each article, using the
output of the LIWC analysis to construct its ratio of pos-
itive to negative affective content. Following prior stud-
ies, I coded an article as “positive” if at least 60% of
its affective content was positively valenced and “nega-
tive” if at least 60% of affective content was negatively
valenced (Pfarrer et al. 2010).
Next, I collapsed all articles about each company in
a given year into a variable capturing general public
approval using the Janis and Fadner (1965) (JF) coeffi-
cient of imbalance. The JF coefficient has been widely
used to control for the aggregate emotional valence
of media coverage (Deephouse 2000, Janis and Fadner
1965, Pollock and Rindova 2003, Pfarrer et al. 2010). It
equals
4P 2 − PN 5/V 2
if P > N 1
and 4PN − N 2 5/V 2
0
if P = N 1
if N > P 1
where P is the number of positive articles about a firm
in a given year, N is the number of negative articles, and
V is the total number of articles. The JF coefficient pro-
duces a variable, Public Approval, that ranges from −1
to 1. Firms with a public approval score of −1 received
only negative coverage, whereas firms with score of 1
received only positive coverage. I test H3 by interact-
ing this variable and the Successful Contentious Chal-
lenges and Unsuccessful Contentious Challenges vari-
ables described above.
Control Variables
Across all models, I control for a host of variables asso-
ciated with the likelihood that a firm will be targeted
by, or vulnerable to, contentious challenges. Activists
tend to aim their contentious attacks at large, high-
status firms, which attract more media attention (King
2008, King and McDonnell 2015). To control for differ-
ences in firm size, I include each firm’s logged assets
and logged employees, derived from Compustat’s annual
firm metrics. To control for status, I include a variable
that is coded as 1 if a firm appeared in Fortune maga-
zine’s World’s Most Admired Companies annual index
and 0 otherwise. The World’s Most Admired Compa-
nies index is a useful proxy for general status, because
it is constructed using surveys of industry analysts and
the executives of industry peers, capturing insiders’ per-
ceptions about which firms inhabit the incumbent elite
in their field. The World’s Most Admired Companies
index is regularly employed as a proxy for a company’s
overall esteem (Fombrun and Shanley 1990, Staw and
Epstein 2000, Roberts and Dowling 2002, King 2008,
McDonnell and King 2013, McDonnell et al. 2015).McDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
61
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
To control for media attention, I include a count vari-
able capturing the number of articles with the firm’s
name in the headline that appeared in the six largest
U.S. newspapers—the New York Times, the Washington
Post, the Wall Street Journal, the Chicago Tribune, USA
Today, and the Los Angeles Times—in the prior year.
A firm’s performance may also affect its engagement
in corporate-sponsored activism. I account for this pos-
sibility by controlling for firms’ market-to-book ratio,
the ratio of the market value to the book value of out-
standing equity, per Compustat. A firm’s market perfor-
mance, as reflected in its share price, captures audience
assessments of the quality of the firm’s present manage-
rial strategy. A low market-to-book value indicates that
incumbent management is evaluated less highly, expos-
ing the firm to a higher risk of takeover and managerial
ouster (Davis and Stout 1992). In such cases, managers
may be reticent to embark on risky social strategies,
because they may be subject to higher levels of scrutiny.
It is possible that activists aim their challenges at
companies whose shareholders care more about social
issues. These companies are arguably more vulnerable
to activism, insofar as management will be pressured
to attend to and respond to social issues that share-
holders find compelling. I therefore include a variable
assessing general levels of social shareholder activism.
This variable is a count of the number of social-issue
shareholder proposals that were submitted to a firm in a
given year, as reported in the ICCR’s archival database
of social-issue proposals. The ICCR it is a coalition
of investors and NGOs that coordinates shareholder
activism. The organization maintains detailed archival
accounts of socially oriented shareholder resolutions,
including the proponent and issue raised in the resolu-
tion, as well as the company’s response to it.
Finally, I included a set of controls to account for
the possibility that firms that are more cognizant about
their social performance are both more likely to be tar-
geted by social activists and are more likely to join
social activist boycotts. First, a firm’s perceived social
responsibility may affect the likelihood that it will be
targeted by activist challenges (King and McDonnell
2015), and firms that have an established reputation for
being prosocial may also be more likely to join with
activist groups in sponsoring what they perceive to be
prosocial initiatives. To account for this possibility, I
controlled for sampled firms’ membership in the United
Nations Global Compact, the largest international corpo-
rate social responsibility initiative. Firms that sign onto
the global compact voluntarily commit to the compact’s
stated principles of sustainability and corporate citizen-
ship, as well as agree to file annual reports detailing
their social activity. Although the ability of the com-
pact leadership to monitor and enforce the compact’s
standards has been criticized, membership nevertheless
represents a visible signal of a firm’s commitment to
socially responsible behavior, making it a defensible
proxy for perceived social responsibility. In addition to
being perceived as more socially responsible, some firms
may be more receptive to activist challenges, which
may both invite activist targeting (Baron and Diermeier
2007, Briscoe and Safford 2008) and increase the like-
lihood of activist collaborations. To address this poten-
tial source of endogeneity, I incorporate a control for a
firm’s observed receptivity. Following McDonnell et al.
(2015), I began by categorizing all firm responses to
social-issue proxy proposals in the prior year as being
either positive (if the firm voluntarily ceded to the pro-
posal), neutral (if the proposal was put to a vote at the
firm’s annual meeting), or negative (if the firm chal-
lenged the proposal by petitioning the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission for permission to exclude it).
Firm responses to proxy proposals were available in the
ICCR data described above. I then collapsed all of a
firm’s responses in a given year into a receptivity vari-
able using a JF coefficient:
4P 2 − PN 5/V 2
if P > N 1
2
and 4PN − N 5/V
2
0
if P = N 1
if N > P 1
where P is the number of positive firm responses (i.e.,
withdrawals), N is the number of negative responses
(i.e., challenges), and V is the total number of social-
issue proxy proposals submitted to a firm in a given year.
The result is a variable ranging from −1 (least receptive)
to 1 (most receptive). When a firm received no social
proxy proposals in the prior year, I used the JF coeffi-
cient of its responses in the last year in which it received
at least one proposal, given that activists are likely to
base perceptions of corporate receptivity on past activist
interactions (Briscoe and Safford 2008).
It is likely that activist attacks affect some indus-
tries more intensely than others. In the retail industry,
for example, where performance often depends on con-
sumers’ perceptions of the integrity of branded products,
companies may be more threatened by image attacks
than, say, in the construction industry, where most cus-
tomers are corporate clients with long-term contracts.
Thus, I include a separate categorical control for each
of the eight Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) sec-
tors represented in the sample: agriculture, construction,
transportation, communications, retail, finance, services,
and administrative. To account for the possibility that
social scrutiny of different industries is likely to vary
over time, I additionally include a control, Sector Con-
tention, that captures the average number of activist chal-
lenges that all other sampled firms in a focal firm’s SIC
sector received in the prior year.
Finally, to account for temporal variance in activist
challenges, I control for time. In the models testing
H1, I include yearly fixed effects. As is customary inMcDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
62
discrete-time event history analyses used to test H2A–
H3, I include a Time Clock control, reflecting the number
of years that the company has been in the panel. This
variable is coded 0 for all companies in the first year of
the sample (1993), counting up to a maximum of 14 for
firms that remain in the final year of the panel (2007).
Analysis
Hypothesis 1, which asks whether the corporate-
sponsored boycott effectively reduces the likelihood of
contentious challenges, is tested in a series of panel
regression models. The dependent variable, Total Activist
Challenges, is a count variable that ranges from 0 to 6.
Because being targeted is a relatively rare occurrence
for most companies, this dependent variable is 0 for
the vast majority of observations (n = 41109). Most of
the companies that were challenged by activists received
only one challenge in a given year (n = 176). Although
only a small number of firms were targeted more heavily
(n = 41), prior work finds that activist challenges have a
cumulative effect on the likelihood that firms will attend
to and respond to social issues (McDonnell et al. 2015).
This suggests that the dependent variable differs for this
handful of observations in practically significant ways.
Thus, I chose to use a random-effects negative bino-
mial model as my primary model. However, recognizing
that this dependent variable does not accord to a typi-
cal overdispersed Poisson distribution, I also show the
model as a random-effects logistic regression, where the
dependent variable is coded as 1 for all observations that
received one or more activist challenges. I also examined
zero-inflated negative binomial models, which resulted
in results substantively similar to those in the models
shown here.
All models include a one-year lagged version of the
dependent variable, split into unsuccessful challenges
and successful challenges, to control for the likelihood
of serial correlation between a firm’s past and present
activist challenges. By including this variable, I sought
to control for stable levels of contention, focusing my
models instead on the growth or reduction in the amount
of contention a company faces from year to year. The
likelihood of being targeted by a boycott is endoge-
nous to past targeting, as activists use a firm’s past
responses when challenged as a signal of the likeli-
hood that the firm will be receptive to future challenges
(Briscoe and Safford 2008). Because past challenges are
causally related to both future challenges and the likeli-
hood of participating in a corporate-sponsored boycott,
this was an important control to include to minimize
omitted variable bias. That said, including the lagged
dependent variable can downwardly bias the coefficients
of independent variables. To ensure that this bias did
not drive the observed results, I replicated all models
without the lagged dependent variable, producing sub-
stantively similar results to those shown here.
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
I attempted to run these models as fixed-effects mod-
els to account for all firm-level, time-invariant poten-
tial sources of endogeneity, but fixed-effects models
did not converge. This is a common problem for
fixed-effects models with limited dependent variables,
which tend to produce inconsistent parameter estimates
(Heckman 1981). As a robustness check to assure that
the random-effects estimation does not produce biased
results relating to my independent variable, I include a
final replication of the primary model using conditional
fixed effects. Conditional fixed-effects models necessar-
ily exclude all firms that do not experience any varia-
tion in the dependent variable, thus dropping all sam-
pled firms that experienced no activist targeting over the
course of the panel. Because of the large number of sam-
pled companies that were never targeted by a boycott
over the course of the panel, this approximation resulted
in a much lower number of observations than the pri-
mary models (n = 11277).
To test H2A, H2B, and H3, which predict the like-
lihood of a corporate-sponsored boycott, I employ a
series of discrete-time event history analyses (Allison
1984). Models use the calendar year as the time clock,
with discrete time measures calculated for each calen-
dar year. Given that firms were at risk of sponsoring
a social movement boycott more than once over the
duration of the spell, I treat the measure as a repeatable
event (Boeker 1992, Zajac and Westphal 1996, Joseph
et al. 2014).
To reduce endogeneity and allow for better causal
approximation, all independent and control variables are
lagged, excepting the shareholder activism and status
variables, which are naturally lagged: Shareholder pro-
posals are submitted to a company in the calendar year
prior to that in which they are included in the firm’s
proxy materials, and Fortune’s index is based on sur-
vey data collected in the calendar year prior to the year
in which they are published. To address potential het-
eroskedasticity in the error terms, I obtain robust stan-
dard errors across all models, clustered by company.
The dependent variable in these models—sponsoring
a social movement boycott—is a rare event and highly
imbalanced over the course of the panel. In such cases,
logistic regressions can underestimate the probability
of the occurrence of rare events. To make sure that
this aspect of my data does not affect the results, I
ran a robustness test replicating all models with King
and Zeng’s (2001) statistical correction for rare events
using the relogit command in Stata 13. The results pro-
vided in the main models were robust to the use of this
rare events correction, producing only minor differences
in the size and significance of the coefficients for all
independent variables. Descriptive statistics and bivari-
ate correlations are provided in Table 1.McDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
63
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
Table 1
Descriptive Statistics and Correlation Table
Variable
Mean
SD
1
2
3
4
5
6
1 Corporate-Sponsored Boycott
00016 0012 1000
2 Total Contentious Challenges
00063 0032 0016 1000
3 Successful Contentious
00011 0011 0011 0053 1000
Challenges
4 Unsuccessful Contentious
00052 0028 0013 0094 0022 1000
Challenges
5 Public Approval
00078 0027 0008 0013 0007 0012 1000
6 Status
00533 0050 0007 0011 0006 0010 0011 1000
7 Logged Employees
30228 1031 0014 0022 0011 0021 0019 0043
8 Logged Assets
90138 1046 0005 0016 0007 0016 0017 0032
9 Market-to-Book Ratio
30207 10015 0002 0002 0002 0002 0007 0003
10 Media Attention
150457 39091 0011 0026 0011 0025 0018 0020
11 Shareholder Social Activism
00463 1004 0011 0030 0008 0031 0011 0021
12 Perceived Social Responsibility 00018 0013 0005 0010 −0001 0012 0001 0007
13 Receptivity
00053 0031 −0001 −0002 −0004 −0001 −0001 0008
14 Sector Contention
00513 0031 0006 0004 0001 0005 0006 0016
Results
Results for models testing the corporate-sponsored boy-
cott’s effect on contentious targeting are shown in
Table 2. Models 2–4 provide support for H1, because
a firm’s participation in a corporate-sponsored boycott
is significantly associated with a reduction in the num-
ber of activist challenges that it faces in the following
year. Results from the random-effects negative binomial
model shown in Model 2 suggest that participation in
a corporate-sponsored boycott is associated with a 56%
reduction in the number of activist challenges in the fol-
lowing year.
The control variables in these models also yield inter-
esting results, which deserve mention. First, whereas
past unsuccessful activist challenges are not signifi-
cantly predictive of the number of future contentious
challenges, Models 1, 2, and 4 suggest that successful
challenges are significantly positively related to the like-
lihood of being challenged in the future. This supports
Briscoe and Safford’s (2008) suggestion that activists
may heuristically employ a firm’s concessions to prior
challenges as a signal of the firm’s likely receptivity to
future challenges, increasing the likelihood that they will
target the firm. Across all models, I find that firms are
more likely to be targeted when they have higher public
approval, complementing King and McDonnell’s (2015)
finding that activists tend to target more reputable firms.
Models 1–3 also replicate prior findings that firms are
more likely to be targeted when they are larger and more
actively in the public eye (King 2008, McDonnell and
King 2013), as logged employees and media attention
are each positively and significantly related to the num-
ber of activist challenges targeting a firm. Finally, all
models provide suggestive evidence that companies that
are targeted with more shareholder social activism are
likely to be targeted with more contentious extrainstitu-
tional activism. Extrainstitutional activists may choose
to target companies with socially active shareholders on
7 8 9
1000
0053
0003
0033
0037
0007
0006
0015 1000
0001
0035
0041
0009
0006
0020 1000
0001
0002
0001
0001
0003
10
11
12
13
1000
0028 1000
0010 0013 1000
0003 −0001 0001 1000
0001 0015 0012 0001
the assumption that a firm’s decision makers are more
likely to attend to social issues when its shareholders
signal their concern for the firm’s social behavior.
To probe the temporal limitations of these results, I
ran robustness analyses replacing the one-year lagged
version of the independent variable with the lagged
two- and three-year moving averages of the total num-
ber of corporate-sponsored boycotts in which a given
firm participated, respectively. Results were robust to
inclusion of the two-year moving average of corporate-
sponsored boycotts. Margins analysis of a replication of
Model 2 with the two-year moving average of corporate-
sponsored boycotts suggests that a firm’s participation
in one corporate-sponsored boycott in the past two
years is associated with a 40% reduction in the number
of activist challenges in the following year. However,
the lagged three-year moving average of corporate-
sponsored boycotts was only marginally significantly
related to future targeting (p = 0006), which sug-
gests that the relationship between corporate-sponsored
activism and future targeting is temporary. This is unsur-
prising, given that new and different social problems and
activist organizations are likely to become salient each
year, requiring firms to continuously and actively deploy
their performance repertoire to manage contention on an
ongoing basis.
Discrete time event history models predicting firms’
participation in corporate-sponsored boycotts are shown
in Table 3. The control variables in these models sug-
gest that the firms that participate in corporate-sponsored
boycotts tend to be higher-status firms with more public
approval, more employees, and greater media attention.
Participants in corporate-sponsored boycotts also tend to
operate in more contentious industry sectors. Better per-
forming firms are more likely to use the tactic, which
is likely due to managers’ increased willingness to par-
ticipate in a risky social tactic when their core strategyMcDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
64
Table 2
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
Regressions Exploring the Relationship Between Participation in a Corporate-Sponsored Boycott and Future
Activist Challenges
Random-effects
logistic regression
of total activist
challenges Conditional fixed-
effects negative
binomal regression
of total activist
challenges
Model 2 Model 3 Model 4
−00563 ∗
400275 −00901 ∗
400445 −00723 ∗∗
400275
Random-effects negative
binomal regression of total
activist challenges
Model 1
Independent variable (Lagged)
Lagged Corporate-Sponsored Boycott
Control variables (Lagged)
Unsuccessful Activist Challenges
Successful Activist Challenges
Public Approval
Status
Logged Employees
Logged Assets
Market-to-Book Ratio
Media Attention
Shareholder Social Activism
Perceived Social Responsibility
Receptivity to Activists
Sector Contention
Fixed effects for year
Fixed effects for industry
Constant
N
Log pseudolikelihood
−00037
400095
00515 ∗
400215
00575 ∗∗
400185
00203
400165
00550 ∗∗∗
400125 −00039
400095
00515 ∗
400215
00589 ∗∗
400185
00228
400165
00561 ∗∗∗
400125 00019
400185
00564
400395
00808 ∗∗∗
400205
00149
400205
00695 ∗∗∗
400155 −00165
400095
00409 ∗
400205
00442 ∗
400205
−00296
400175
00350
400325
00211
400115
00009
400015
00003 ∗∗
400005
00182 ∗∗∗
400045
00638
400345 00199
400115
00009
400015
00003 ∗∗∗
400005
00188 ∗∗∗
400045
00592
400345 00178
400135
00009
400015
00005 ∗∗
400005
00239 ∗∗∗
400065
00409
400485 00306
400245
00000
400015
00001
400005
00140 ∗∗
400045
−00052
400365
00167
400165
−00059
400425 00177
400165
−00084
400435 00206
400205
−00192
400535 −00276
400155
−00576
400375
Yes
Yes Yes
Yes Yes
Yes Yes
Yes
−50133 ∗∗∗
410235
4,326
−738065 −50014 ∗∗∗
410245
4,326
−736016 −90311 ∗∗∗
410225
4,326
−603055
−20934
430095
1,277
−474043
Note. Robust standard errors, clustered by firm, are in parentheses.
∗
p < 00001; ∗∗ p < 0001; ∗∗∗ p < 0005.
is not under scrutiny because of poor performance. Sev-
eral models suggest that perceived social responsibility
is positively and significantly associated with the likeli-
hood of participating in a corporate-sponsored boycott.
This may indicate that firms that care more about their
social responsibility are also more likely to be willing to
act as activists by joining activist campaigns. It is also
possible that activists are more willing to collaborate
with firms that are perceived to be more socially respon-
sible, such that these firms have more opportunities to
ally themselves with social movement campaigns.
Hypotheses 2A and 2B suggest that firms will be more
likely to participate in a corporate-sponsored boycott
when they have been targeted with greater numbers
of activist challenges, especially when those challenges
successfully elicited a concession. Both hypotheses are
supported. The lagged number of activist challenges is
positively and significantly related to the likelihood of
a corporate-sponsored boycott in Model 2. When this
variable is bifurcated into separate counts of success-
ful and unsuccessful challenges, only successful chal-
lenges are positively and significantly associated with
the likelihood of engagement in a corporate-sponsored
boycott (Model 3). A margins analysis with all other
variables held at their mean suggests that firms that did
not concede to any boycotts in the prior year have aMcDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
65
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
Table 3
Discrete-Time Event History Models Predicting Participation in a Corporate-Sponsored Boycott, 1993–2007
Model 1
Independent variables (Lagged)
Total Activist Challenges
Model 2
10179 ∗∗
400455
Unsuccessful Activist Challenges
−00117
400525
Successful Activist Challenges ×
Public Approval
Unsuccessful Activist Challenges ×
Public Approval
Control variables (Lagged)
Public Approval
Status
Logged Employees
Logged Assets
Market-to-Book Ratio
Media Attention
Shareholder Social Activism
Perceived Social Responsibility
Receptivity to Activists
Sector Contention
Time Clock
Fixed effects for industry
Constant
N
Log pseudolikelihood
Pseudo-R 2
Model 4
00411 ∗∗
400155
Successful Activist Challenges
Model 3
10884 ∗∗
400665
−00154
400575
−20174 ∗
410105
00071
400375
00904 ∗
400355
00911 ∗∗
400315 00836 ∗
400365
00929 ∗∗
400315 00875 ∗
400365
00897 ∗∗
400315 00984 ∗∗
400355
00934 ∗∗
400315
00835 ∗∗∗
400165
−00435 ∗
400185
00012 ∗∗
400005
00004 ∗∗
400005
00138
400095 00804 ∗∗∗
400155
−00415 ∗
400185
00012 ∗∗
400005
00003 ∗
400005
00096
400095 00814 ∗∗∗
400165
−00432 ∗
400185
00012 ∗∗
400005
00004 ∗
400005
00131
400095 00812 ∗∗∗
400165
−00439 ∗
400185
00012 ∗∗
400005
00004 ∗∗
400005
00121
400095
10163 ∗
400575
−00327
400375
10007 ∗
400405
00012
400035 10042
400595
−00256
400355
00988 ∗
400395
00014
400035 10240 ∗
400585
−00223
400385
00998 ∗
400395
00014
400035 10241 ∗
400595
−00242
400385
00986 ∗
400385
00033
400035
Yes
−40541 ∗∗
410395
4,326
−285014
0020
Yes
−40611 ∗∗
410405
4,326
−282081
0021
Yes
−40503 ∗∗
410405
4,326
−282048
0021
Yes
−40476 ∗∗
410405
4,326
−28102
0021
Note. Robust standard errors, clustered by firm, are in parentheses.
∗
p < 00001; ∗∗ p < 0001; ∗∗∗ p < 0005.
1.5% likelihood of sponsoring a boycott, whereas firms
that conceded to three boycotts in the prior year have
an 18.5% likelihood. The main effect of the number of
successful challenges remains significant in Model 4,
when it is interacted with public approval to test H3.
The interaction of public approval and successful activist
challenges is, as hypothesized, significantly negatively
related to the likelihood of a corporate-sponsored boy-
cott.
To assist with interpretation, Figure 1 graphically
depicts this interaction. Figure 1 shows that companies
are unlikely to participate in corporate-sponsored boy-
cotts regardless of their levels of public approval when
they face low numbers of successful contentious chal-
lenges (one challenge or less). However, as the num-
ber of successful contentious challenges increases, all
firms become more likely to sponsor a boycott, and this
is especially true of firms with low public approval.
Among firms that conceded to two challenges in the
prior year, firms with public approval at one standard
deviation below the mean are over twice as likely to
participate in a corporate-sponsored boycott as firms
with public approval at one standard deviation above the
mean. Thus, overt corporate-sponsored activism appears
to be a more attractive strategic option for less reputableMcDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
66
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
Figure 1
0.8
(Color online) Predicted Likelihood of a
Corporate-Sponsored Boycott as a Function of the
Interaction of the Target’s Public Approval and the
Number of Successful Activist Challenges in the
Prior Year
1SD below mean public approval
Mean public approval
1SD above mean public approval
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
1
2
3
Total successful contentious challenges in prior year
firms seeking to address high levels of contention in their
social environments.
To probe the duration of these effects, in robustness
analyses I replicated Model 4, replacing the Unsuccess-
ful Activist Challenges and Successful Activist Chal-
lenges variables with the lagged two- and three-year
moving averages of these variables. Again, all hypoth-
esized effects remain significant across each of these
lag specifications, evidencing that activist challenges are
likely to affect targeted firms’ nonmarket strategies over
a longer period of time than just one year.
Discussion and Conclusion
This paper explores an emergent organizational phe-
nomenon, the corporate-sponsored boycott, as a con-
temporary instantiation of overt corporate-sponsored
activism. This paper engages in a quantitative empir-
ical analysis of the incidence and effects of this tac-
tic among a sample of 300 randomly selected Fortune
500 companies followed from 1993 to 2007. My find-
ings suggest that overt corporate-sponsored activism is
a tactic of last resort. It is selected when companies
find themselves losing their battles against contentious
activists, especially when their public approval is falter-
ing. Furthermore, the present analyses provide evidence
that corporate-sponsored activism can be an effective
tactic to address problematic levels of contention, as it
is associated with significant decreases in the number
of contentious challenges targeting participating firms.
Qualitative evidence from interviews with corporate par-
ticipants suggest that firm leaders are mindful of the tac-
tic’s usefulness for reducing contention by either directly
or indirectly co-opting contentious activists.
The findings in this paper contribute to work in social
movement theory, nonmarket strategy, and corporate
social responsibility, each of which is discussed in turn
below.
Contributions to Social Movement Theory
This paper contributes to social movement theory by
exploring the situations in which institutional incum-
bents, like their challenger counterparts, engage in
processes of tactical innovation that produce “novel,
dramatic, unorthodox, and noninstitutionalized forms of
political expression to try to shape public opinion”
(Taylor and Van Dyke 2008, p. 263). Studies of conven-
tional state-targeted social movements have suggested
that movement tactics often prompt reciprocal tactics
or countermovements from their targets (e.g., Meyer
and Staggenborg 1996, McAdam 1983); however, the
extent to which movements elicit tactical countermo-
bilization from their targets continues to be an under-
studied movement outcome (Van Dyke et al. 2004; cf.
Jasper and Poulsen 1993). As Jasper and Poulsen (1993)
argue, most research on movement outcomes fails to
take into account the strategic interplay between move-
ments and their targets. Rather than seeing movement
outcomes as one-and-done scenarios, they argue that we
should instead visualize movement–target interactions
“as an open-ended game depending on clever moves”
(Jasper and Poulsen 1993, p. 646). This paper con-
tributes to social movement theory by exploring targets’
deployment of their defensive performance repertoire.
Specifically, my findings shed light on when firms are
likely to defend themselves from activist challenges by
openly participating in contentious politics, rather than
using evasive or diversionary tactics. I find that firms
are more likely to turn to overt corporate-sponsored
activism during periods of especially high institutional
uncertainty, when they are being targeted by many con-
tentious activists and being forced to concede to chal-
lenger movements when targeted. In such situations,
firms may perceive their institutional order to be in jeop-
ardy, spurring them to resort to radical performances in
an effort to restore social stability.
By exploring the link between contentious targeting
and corporate involvement in social movement cam-
paigns, this paper also contributes to prior work exam-
ining the ways in which activism is associated with
more general trends in corporate social practices (e.g.,
Lounsbury 2001, Rao 1998, Den Hond and De Bakker
2007, McDonnell et al. 2015). Specifically, my find-
ings suggest that firms confronted with more—and more
threatening—social activism are more likely to seek
out collaborations with activists. Thus, general levels of
environmental stability may predict the extent to which
firms openly express their support for ongoing social
movement campaigns.
Contributions to Corporate Social Responsibility
My analyses suggest that firms’ use of corporate-
sponsored activism may be driven by instrumental
motivations—namely, to decrease the likelihood of being
targeted by contentious challenges—rather than out ofMcDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
a veritable prosocial intent. That said, defensive tactics
can lead to substantive changes in the way that firms
process social issues. As McDonnell et al. (2015) argue,
the practices and structures that firms adopt to defend
themselves from activism can have the incidental effect
of opening up new opportunities for activists to influ-
ence firms. Firms that engage in collaboration may also
develop capabilities for collaboration that make them
more receptive to amiable partnerships with activists. As
one corporate executive I had the opportunity to inter-
view said:
[For us,] working with NGOs became a competency. We
also resourced it. We had a team of people, many of
whom were ex-campaigners. 0 0 0 [We] had people on the
inside who knew that world and could translate what a
company wants to do versus what an NGO wants to do.
So we generated a certain amount of trust with the NGOs.
As this quote illustrates, though firms may initially
sponsor activism out of strategic necessity, it is possible
that such collaborations provoke more permanent strate-
gic shifts in the way that firms interact with activists.
Whereas firms may sponsor activism to co-opt allies
within the activist population to stave off contentious
challenges, activist NGOs may simultaneously seek out
relationships with firms to more directly influence cor-
porate social behavior (McDonnell et al. 2015). Co-
optation, in this sense, can affect the character of either
party to a collaborative relationship. Prior research on
cross-sector alliances provides evidence that collabora-
tive partnerships with activists tend to improve a firm’s
trust of activists as a general group (Yaziji and Doh
2009). Thus, initial collaborations may make organiza-
tions more receptive to social activists in the future. This
sentiment surfaced in one of my interviews with a for-
mer executive director of social policy at a large interna-
tional retailer. In the early 1990s, this executive played
an integral role in an activist campaign that the company
and several NGOs waged against a mammoth energy
company. Reflecting on the transformative aspect of a
corporate-sponsored activist campaign, he remarked:
People learn their way into a relationship. The CEO
might have been skeptical when the junior guy in cor-
porate communications said let’s sponsor stuff with [a
known activist organization]. But then, the CEO has a
few nice experiences and he or she then learns their way
into a more sophisticated, more global citizen style of
leadership. 0 0 0 As these organizations play with the issues
and as they get into more relationships, they are likely to
shift.
This qualitative evidence suggests that overt corporate-
sponsored activism may provoke long-term shifts in cor-
porate social behavior. Although it is beyond the scope
of the present study, one promising area for future
research is to examine the ways in which initial for-
ays into sponsored activism may shift the manner in
which organizations process social issues and interact
with social activists.
67
Contributions to Nonmarket Strategy
Whereas research in nonmarket strategy depicts corpo-
rations as actively engaging with political institutions
through lobbying and political contributions, strategy
scholars have primarily addressed social movements as
something that companies should actively avoid by,
for example, impression management and reputation
building (Baron and Diermeier 2007). To the con-
trary, my findings suggest that firms in especially dire
social straits may also seek to manage challenging
nonmarket environments by strategically allying them-
selves with contentious social movements. I provide
direct evidence that such alliances can have a palliative
effect on the contentiousness of firms’ environments, as
corporate-sponsored boycotts are associated with signif-
icant decreases in the likelihood of being targeted.
It is possible that, in addition to reducing a firm’s
likelihood of being targeted by contentious challenges,
social alliances with powerful NGOs may offer more
general benefits to a firm’s nonmarket strategy. My find-
ings suggest that the social capital that firms build with
the activists with whom they ally may prove beneficial
when these allies dissuade other activists in their net-
work from targeting the firm. But activist allies can also
stand up for a firm in other ways, such as providing char-
acter references when a firm’s normative appropriateness
is challenged, such as in the midst of a scandal. This was
expressed by one executive I interviewed whose firm had
a long history of partnering with activists:
I do recall that during [one reputational crisis when
we] got very spooked, that we needed to reach out to
our friends. And there were friends in the NGO move-
ment who rallied, to be honest. So you could argue
that that was our historic social capital coming through
for us. So any goodwill that we had built in the NGO
world 0 0 0 actually meant that the company’s reputation
wasn’t totally trashed even when we were getting quite
severe criticism.
Whereas the present study examines corporate-spon-
sored activism as a strategic solution to the problem of
contention within firms’ nonmarket environments, it is
also possible that these alliances benefit a firm’s ability
to weather reputational threats more generally, a topic
that merits future inquiry.
Limitations and Opportunities for Future Work
This paper’s findings are limited in important ways,
many of which present an opportunity for future work.
This paper introduces the corporate-sponsored boycott
as a representative instantiation of overt corporate-
sponsored activism to explore these tactics’ conse-
quences and the conditions under which they are used.
For these purposes, I treated the corporate-sponsored
boycott as a uniform tactic in my analyses. However,
this ignores a number of important sources of within-
tactic variation that could affect their consequences, asMcDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
68
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
well as which firms participate. For example, corporate-
sponsored boycotts vary in terms of their cost and risk
to the firm, which likely affect firms’ willingness to be
involved. A firm’s choice of which campaigns to spon-
sor may also depend on its own culture and values. One
of my interviewees discussed the strategic balancing of
these separate issues, saying:
There are always going to be complaints. Some activists
plainly just don’t want [one of our core products] to exist.
And we obviously won’t make that happen. 0 0 0 But we
don’t only work on things that don’t cost us. 0 0 0 [And]
historically you can see that we have given up some
profit. 0 0 0 [T]here is certainly a selection process that goes
into what types of campaigns we look to be involved
in 0 0 0 [in which we] balance costs with how much our
customers value the goals and how well it aligns with
our mission and strategic objectives.
Although it is beyond the scope of the present study,
a more detailed analysis into the within-firm decision-
making process that determines which campaigns a com-
pany chooses to join and which activists it seeks to forge
alliances with is an important question left open for
future research. Such an analysis might also consider the
within-firm characteristics that drive this process, such
as the CEO’s ideology or the governance structures in
place that determine how a company attends to and pro-
cesses potential social problems. Additionally, such an
analysis should account for the very likely possibility
that not all activists will be willing to collaborate with
all firms. A scandalized firm may have fewer options
when seeking out an alliance than a firm with an excel-
lent reputation for social responsibility.
The corporate-sponsored boycotts in my sample also
differ in terms of their ideological and political orienta-
tion. For example, Sears’ decision to protest Benetton’s
opposition to the death penalty (a relatively conservative
stance) is likely to affect its relationships with stakehold-
ers in very different ways than Wal-Mart’s decision to
boycott Uzbekistan cotton to protest the local industry’s
use of child laborers (a relatively liberal stance). Future
work is necessary to tease out the practical significance
of firms’ decisions about exactly what campaigns to sup-
port. Do companies support movements with the same
political orientation as the political parties that they sup-
port in their formal political strategy? Does ideological
coherence matter for the outcomes of these nonmarket
strategies?
The data set employed in this study focuses on a sam-
ple of companies, allowing for the systematic examina-
tion of the company-specific factors associated with this
tactic. However, this level of analysis limits the ques-
tions that can be sufficiently explored in this context. For
example, the company-level analysis precludes a direct
test of my proposed mechanisms of direct and indirect
co-optation. Whereas I relied on qualitative evidence to
support these mechanisms in motivating my hypotheses,
future work that adopts a social network approach would
be useful to provide a more precise quantitative explo-
ration of how social alliances with NGOs affect firms’
relationships with the NGO population more generally.
Finally, I chose to focus on the corporate-sponsored
boycott because it is an innovative, emerging tactic that
is overtly contentious in nature, thus presenting a clear,
conservative test of corporate-sponsored activism. How-
ever, the tactic is relatively rare and radical, which may
limit the generalizability of my findings. Because boy-
cotts demand a concession from their target, it is easy
to determine whether a boycott has succeeded or failed.
This may make companies cautious about signing on
to boycotts, not wanting to be associated with failure.
Certainly, less contentious forms of corporate-sponsored
activism, such as when companies voluntarily opt in
to supply chain standards or openly support calls for
action on climate change, can put implicit pressure on
other companies to follow suit. Future work is needed to
understand when firms engage in these less contentious
forms of activism.
Acknowledgments
The author is indebted to Senior Editor Chris Marquis and
two anonymous reviewers for providing her with truly inspira-
tional feedback throughout the reviewing process. For helpful
advice on this project, the author is additionally grate-
ful to Brayden King, Bruce Carruthers, Klaus Weber, Paul
Hirsch, Ed Zajac, Chris Rider, Jiao Luo, Caroline Flammer,
Olga Hawn, Ed Walker, Hayagreeva Rao, Shon Hiatt, Victor
Bennett, Joshua Margolis, Tima Bansal, Oana Branzei, and
Andy Spicer; participants in seminars at Harvard Business
School, the Wharton School, Penn State University, the Uni-
versity of Michigan, Georgetown University, the University
of Georgia, McGill University, the University of Texas, the
University of Missouri, Johns Hopkins University, and the
Academy of Management Meetings in Boston; participants
in the 2012 Alliance for Research on Corporate Sustainabil-
ity Ph.D. Academy; and participants and reviewers involved
in the INFORMS/Organization Science Dissertation Proposal
Competition.
Endnotes
1
An alternative explanation for the link between concession
and sponsoring activism might be that companies that are more
receptive to social activism would be both more likely to con-
cede when challenged and more active in searching for poten-
tial collaborations with activists. However, prior to bringing
a contentious challenge, activists typically contact the com-
pany and promote a positive response through less contentious
means. If a targeted company is truly receptive, they will
likely work with these activists through these initial cooper-
ative channels, in which case a contentious encounter would
not be necessary. Thus, companies that are targeted by outright
contentious tactics like the boycotts in my data are typically
those that have already been resistant to activists. Still, I rec-
ognize receptivity as a potential conflating mechanism and I
address it by incorporating a proxy that controls for it sepa-
rately in my empirical models.McDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
2
Four companies in the sample sponsored two boycotts within
the same year, but no company sponsored more than two boy-
cotts within the same year.
3
By limiting corporate-sponsored boycotts to those that are
observed in the media, my analysis does assume that firms that
wish to cooperate with social movement organizations will be
successful in doing so. I believe that this assumption is defen-
sible, given the large variety of social movement organizations
and active social movement campaigns within the field at any
given time. Although it is possible that some activists may
shun stigmatized firms, this decision is likely driven by the
activists’ immediate resource needs and the particular cam-
paign at issue, and a resource-strapped movement will likely
be hard-pressed to turn away a willing sponsor. Additionally,
firms that have engaged in behaviors that have made them very
unpopular with progressive movements may be very popular
with conservative movements, and vice versa. Thus, a firm that
is intent on sponsoring a campaign should be able to find a
willing partner.
4
I chose to test this variable using the one-year lagged count
of corporate-sponsored boycotts (rather than participation in
a corporate-sponsored boycott over a longer period of time)
to limit the number of co-occurring events to allow for bet-
ter causal approximation. Recognizing the possibility that the
effects of participation in a corporate-sponsored boycott on
future targeting may last more than one year, I additionally
ran robustness checks replacing this independent variable with
the lagged two- and three-year moving averages of the total
number of corporate-sponsored boycotts in which a given firm
participated. Results of these robustness checks will be dis-
cussed alongside the results of the one-year lagged variable.
5
Again, given the possibility that contentious encounters have
an effect on firm behavior that lasts longer than one year, I ran
robustness checks replacing these independent variables with
the lagged two- and three-year moving averages of the total
number of successful and unsuccessful contentious challenges.
Results of these robustness checks will be discussed alongside
the results of the one-year lagged variable.
References
Agence France-Presse (1993) Greenpeace backs supermarket boycott
of Norwegian seafood (November 25).
Aldrich D (2010) Site Fights (Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY).
Allison PD (1984) Event History Analysis (Sage, Newbury Park, CA).
Balzer WK, Sulsky LM (1992) Halo and performance appraisal
research: A critical examination. J. Appl. Psych. 77(6):975–985.
Baron DP, Diermeier D (2007) Strategic activism and nonmarket strat-
egy. J. Econom. Management Strategy 16(3):599–634.
Benford RD, Snow DA (2000) Framing processes and social move-
ments: An overview and assessment. Annual Rev. Sociol.
26(1):611–639.
Birchall J (2008) Wal-Mart boycotts Uzbek cotton. Financial Times
(September 30), http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/1362991c-8f07
-11dd-946c-0000779fd18c.html#axzz3oVHKHszN.
Boeker W (1992) Power and managerial dismissal: Scapegoating at
the top. Admin. Sci. Quart. 37(3):400–421.
Briscoe F, Safford S (2008) The Nixon in China effect: Activism,
imitation, and the institutionalization of contentious practices.
Admin. Sci. Quart. 53(3):460–491.
69
Briscoe F, Gupta A, Anner MS (2015) Social activism and practice
diffusion: How activist tactics affect non-targeted organizations.
Admin. Sci. Quart. 60(2):300–332.
Bromley DB (1993) Reputation, Image, and Impression Management
(John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK).
Coombs WT (1999) Ongoing Crisis Communication: Planning, Man-
aging, and Responding (Sage, Los Angeles).
Cox K (2014) Cable lobbyists pretending to be cool digital hipsters
to convince youth that net neutrality is bad. Consumerist
(October 9), http://consumerist.com/2014/10/09/cable-lobbyists
-pretending-to-be-cool-digital-hipsters-to-convince-youth-that-net
-neutrality-is-bad/.
Davis GF, Stout SK (1992) Organization theory and the market for
corporate control: A dynamic analysis of the characteristics of
large takeover targets, 1980–1990. Admin. Sci. Quart. 37(4):
605–633.
Deephouse DL (2000) Media reputation as a strategic resource: An
integration of mass communication and resource-based theories.
J. Management 26(6):1091–1112.
Den Hond F, De Bakker F (2007) Ideologically motivated activism:
How activist groups influence corporate social change activities.
Acad. Management Rev. 32(3):901–924.
Dowling G (2002) Creating Corporate Reputations: Identity, Image,
and Performance (Oxford University Press, New York).
Duffy MJ, Binder AJ, Skrentny JD (2010) Elite status and social
change: Using field analysis to explain policy formation and
implementation. Soc. Problems 57(1):49–73.
Eesley C, Lenox MJ (2006) Firm responses to secondary stakeholder
action. Strategic Management J. 27(8):765–781.
Eisenhardt KM, Schoonhoven CB (1996) Resource-based view of
strategic alliance formation: Strategic and social effects in
entrepreneurial firms. Organ. Sci. 7(2):136–150.
Elsbach K (1994) Managing organizational legitimacy in the Califor-
nia cattle industry: The construction and effectiveness of verbal
accounts. Admin. Sci. Quart. 39(1):57–88.
Fang L (2014) How community groups were duped into join-
ing an anti-net neutrality coalition. Vice News (June 10),
https://news.vice.com/article/how-community-groups-were-duped-into
-joining-an-anti-net-neutrality-coalition.
Feeney MK (2000) Sears customers furious over latest Benetton
ad. Hartford Courant (January 20), http://articles.courant.com/
2000-01-20/news/0001201669_1_benetton-usa-latest-benetton-ad
-benetton-products.
Fligstein N, McAdam D (2011) Toward a general theory of strategic
action fields. Sociol. Theory 29(1):1–26.
Fombrun C (1996) Reputation: Realizing Value from the Corporate
Image (Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, MA).
Fombrun C, Shanley M (1990) What’s in a name? Reputation building
and corporate strategy. Acad. Management J. 33(2):233–258.
Friedman M (1985) Consumer boycotts in the United States, 1970–
1980: Contemporary events in historical perspective. J. Con-
sumer Affairs 19(1):96–117.
Friedman TL (2001) Foreign affairs; A tiger by the tail. New York
Times (June 1), http://www.nytimes.com/2001/06/01/opinion/
foreign-affairs-a-tiger-by-the-tail.html.
Gamson WA (1975) The Strategy of Social Protest (Dorsey Press,
Homewood, IL).
Harris JK, Moreland-Russell S, Choucair B, Mansour R, Staub M,
Simmons K (2014) Tweeting for and against public health pol-
icy: Response to the Chicago Department of Public Health’s
electronic cigarette Twitter campaign. J. Medical Internet Res.
16(10):e238.McDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
70
Heckman J (1981) The incidental parameters problem and the prob-
lem of initial conditions in estimating a discrete time-discrete
data stochastic process and some Monte Carlo evidence. Man-
ski C, McFadden D, eds. Structural Analysis of Discrete Data
with Econometric Applications (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA),
179–195.
Hiatt SR, Park S (2013) Lords of the harvest: Third-party influence
and regulatory approval of genetically modified organisms. Acad.
Management J. 56(4):923–944.
Hiatt SR, Sine WD, Tolbert P (2009) From Pabst to Pepsi: The
deinstitutionalization of social practices and the creation of
entrepreneurial opportunities. Admin. Sci. Quart. 54(4):635–667.
Hillman A, Hitt MA (1999) Corporate political strategy formulations:
A model of approach, participation, and strategy decisions. Acad.
Management Rev. 24(4):825–842.
Huffington Post (2013) 27 companies that aren’t afraid to support
the Supreme Court’s gay marriage rulings. (June 26), http://
www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/06/26/ companies-support-gay
-marriage_n_3503981.html.
Ingram P, Rao H (2004) Store wars: The enactment and repeal of
anti-chain store legislation in America. Amer. J. Sociol. 110(2):
446–487.
Ingram P, Yue LQ, Rao H (2010) Trouble in store: Probes, protests,
and store openings by Wal-Mart, 1998–2007. Amer. J. Sociol.
116(1):53–92.
Janis IL, Fadner RH (1965) The coefficient of imbalance. Lasswell
HD, Leites N, and associates, eds. Language of Politics (MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA), 153–169.
Jasper JM, Poulsen J (1993) Fighting back: Vulnerabilities, blunders
and countermoblization by the targets in three animal rights cam-
paigns. Sociol. Forum 8(4):639–657.
Joseph J, Ocasio W, McDonnell M-H (2014) The structural elabora-
tion of board independence: Executive power, institutional logics,
and the adoption of CEO-only board structures in U.S. corporate
governance. Acad. Management J. 56(6):1834–1858.
King BG (2008) A political mediation model of corporate response
to social movement activism. Admin. Sci. Quart. 53(3):395–421.
King BG, Soule SA (2007) Social movements as extra-institutional
entrepreneurs: The effect of protest on stock price returns.
Admin. Sci. Quart. 52(3):413–442.
King BG, McDonnell M-H (2015) Good firms, good targets: The
relationship between corporate social responsibility, reputation,
and activist targeting. Tsutsui K, Lim A, eds. Corporate Social
Responsibility in a Globalizing World (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK), 430–454.
King G, Zeng L (2001) Logistic regression in rare events data. Polit.
Anal. 9(2):137–163.
Lounsbury M (2001) Institutional sources of practice variation:
Staffing college and university recycling programs. Admin. Sci.
Quart. 46(1):29–56.
Luders J (2006) The economics of movement success: Business
responses to civil rights mobilization. Amer. J. Sociol. 111(4):
963–998.
Lyon TP, Maxwell JW (2004) Astroturf: Interest group lobbying
and corporate strategy. J. Econom. Management Strategy 13(4):
561–597.
Maguire S, Hardy C (2009) Discourse and deinstitutionalization: The
decline of DDT. Acad. Management J. 52(1):148–178.
Marchand R (1998) Creating the Corporate Soul: The Rise of Pub-
lic Relations and Corporate Imagery in American Big Business
(University of California Press, Berkeley).
McAdam D (1983) Tactical innovation and the pace of insurgency.
Amer. Sociol. Rev. 48(6):735–754.
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
McAdam D, Boudet H (2012) Putting Social Movements in
their Place: Explaining Opposition to Energy Projects in the
United States, 2000–2005 (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, UK).
McAdam D, Sampson RJ, Weffer S, MacIndoe H (2005) “There will
be fighting in the streets”: The distorting lens of social movement
theory. Mobilization 10(1):1–18.
McDonnell MH, King BG (2013) Keeping up appearances: Image
threats and impression management after social movement
attacks. Admin. Sci. Quart. 58(3):387–419.
McDonnell MH, King BG (2015) Taxing a tarnished halo: Reputation
and ambiguity in evaluations of corporate transgressions. Work-
ing paper, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
McDonnell MH, Werner T (2015) Blacklisted businesses: Social
activist challenges and the disruption of corporate political activ-
ity. Working paper, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
McDonnell MH, King BG, Soule SA (2015) A dynamic model of
private politics: Activist targeting and corporate receptivity to
social challenges. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 80(3):654–678.
Meyer DS, Staggenborg S (1996) Movements, countermovements,
and the structure of political opportunity. Amer. J. Sociol. 101(6):
1628–1660.
Meznar MB, Nigh D (1995) Buffer or bridge? Environmental and
organizational determinants of public affairs activities in Ameri-
can firms. Acad. Management J. 38(4):975–996.
Mizruchi MS (1996) What do interlocks do? An analysis, critique, and
assessment of research on interlocking directorates. Ann. Rev.
Sociol. 22(1):271–298.
Morales A (2009) Nike to shun Amazon-based leather to help preserve
rainforest. Bloomberg Business (July 23), http://www.bloomberg.
com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=aW8QbEviqJ9o.
Pfarrer MD, Pollock TG, Rindova VP (2010) A tale of two assets:
The effects of firm reputation and celebrity on earnings surprises
and investors’ reactions. Acad. Management J. 53(5):1131–1152.
Pfeffer J, Salancik GR (1978) The External Control of Organiza-
tions: A Resource Dependence Perspective (Harper and Row,
New York).
Pollock TG, Rindova VP (2003) Media legitimation effects in the
market for initial public offerings. Acad. Management J. 46(5):
631–642.
Pring GW, Canan P (1996) SLAPPs: Getting Sued For Speaking Out
(Temple University Press, Philadelphia).
Pruitt SW, Friedman M (1986) Determining the effectiveness of con-
sumer boycotts: A stock price analysis of their impact on corpo-
rate targets. J. Consumer Policy 9(4):375–387.
Rao H (1998) Caveat emptor: The construction of non-profit con-
sumer watchdog organizations. Amer. J. Sociol. 103(4):912–961.
Rao H, Monin P, Durand R (2003) Institutional change in toque ville:
Nouvelle cuisine as an identity movement in French gastronomy.
Amer. J. Sociol. 108(4):795–843.
Rao H, Morrill C, Zald MN (2000) Power plays: How social move-
ments and collective action create new organizational forms. Res.
Organ. Behav. 22:239–282.
Rao H, Yue LQ, Ingram P (2011) Laws of attraction: Arbitrage in
the face of activism in right-to-work states. Amer. Sociol. Rev.
76(4):365–385.
Rindova VP, Pollock TG, Hayward MLA (2006) Celebrity firms: The
social construction of market popularity. Acad. Management Rev.
31(1):50–71.
Roberts PW, Dowling GR (2002) Corporate reputation and sus-
tained superior financial performance. Strategic Management J.
23(12):1077–1093.McDonnell: The Incidence and Impact of Corporate-Sponsored Social Activism
Organization Science 27(1), pp. 53–71, © 2016 INFORMS
Seidman GW (2007) Beyond the Boycott: Labor Rights, Human
Rights, and Transnational Activism (Russell Sage Foundation,
New York).
Selsky JW, Parker B (2005) Cross-sector partnerships to address
social issues: Challenges to theory and practice. J. Management
31(6):849–873.
Selznick P (1949) TVA and the Grass Roots: A Study in the Soci-
ology of Formal Organization (University of California Press,
Berkeley).
Sen S, Gurhan-Canli Z, Morwitz V (2001) Withholding consumption:
A social dilemma perspective on consumer boycotts. J. Con-
sumer Res. 28(3):399–417.
Sine WD, Lee B (2009) Tilting at windmills? The environmental
movement and the emergence of the U.S. wind energy sector.
Admin. Sci. Quart. 54(1):123–155.
Soule SA (2009) Contention and Corporate Social Responsibility
(Cambridge University Press, New York).
Staw BM, Epstein LD (2000) What bandwagons bring: Effects of
popular management techniques on corporate performance, rep-
utation, and CEO pay. Admin. Sci. Quart. 45(3):523–556.
Taylor V, Van Dyke N (2008) “Get up, stand up”: Tactical repertoires
of social movements. Snow DA, Soule SA, Kriesi H, eds. The
Blackwell Companion to Social Movements (Wiley, New York),
262–294.
Tilly C (1978) From Mobilization to Revolution (McGraw-Hill,
New York).
Van Dyke N, Soule SA, Taylor VA (2004) The targets of social move-
ments: Beyond a focus on the state. Res. Soc. Movements, Con-
flicts and Change 25(1):27–51.
Vasi IB, King BG (2012) Social movements, risk perceptions, and
economic outcomes: The effect of primary and secondary stake-
holder activism on firms’ perceived environmental risk and finan-
cial performance. Amer. Sociol. Rev. 77(4):573–596.
Walker ET (2009) Privatizing participation: Civic change and the
organizational dynamics of grassroots lobbying firms. Amer.
Sociol. Rev. 74(1):83–105.
Walker ET (2010) Industry-driven activism. Contexts 9(2):44–49.
Walker ET (2012) Putting a face on the issue: Corporate stakeholder
mobilization in professional grassroots lobbying campaigns. Bus.
Soc. 51(4):561–601.
71
Walker ET (2014) Grassroots for Hire: Public Affairs Consul-
tants in American Democracy (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK).
Walker ET (2015) Astroturfing the field: Elites, business reputation,
and the effects of covert corporate advocacy on public trust.
Working paper, UCLA, Los Angeles.
Walker ET, Rea CM (2014) The political mobilization of firms and
industries. Ann. Rev. Sociol. 40(1):281–304.
Yaziji M, Doh J (2009) NGOs and Corporations: Conflict and Col-
laboration (Cambridge University Press, New York).
Yue LQ (2015) Community constraints on the efficacy of elite mobi-
lization: The issues of currency substitutes during the panic of
1907. Amer. J. Sociol. 120(6):1–46.
Yue LQ, Rao H, Ingram P (2013) Information spillovers from protests
against corporations: A tale of Walmart and Target. Admin. Sci.
Quart. 58(4):669–701.
Zajac EJ, Westphal JD (1996) Director reputation, CEO-board power,
and the dynamics of board interlocks. Admin. Sci. Quart.
41(3):507–529.
Zald MN, McCarthy JD (1980) Social movement industries: Com-
petition and cooperation among movement organizations. Kries-
berg L, ed. Research in Social Movements: Conflicts and Change,
Vol. 3 (JAI Press Inc., Greenwich, CT), 1–20.
Zald MN, Useem B (1987) Movement and countermovement inter-
action: Mobilization, tactics, and state involvement. Zald MN,
McCarthy JD, eds. Social Movements in an Organizational
Society (Transaction, New Brunswick, NJ), 247–271.
Mary-Hunter McDonnell is an assistant professor of man-
agement at the Wharton School, University of Pennsylva-
nia. She holds a JD from Harvard Law School and a Ph.D.
in management and organizations from Northwestern Univer-
sity’s Kellogg School of Management. She studies organiza-
tional behavior within challenging institutional contexts, such
as contentious social environments and uncertain regulatory
environments. In particular, her work explores how political
interactions between corporations and their various stakehold-
ers affect corporate social activity, governance, and nonmarket
strategy.