This article was downloaded by: [143.169.185.95] On: 29 March 2018, At: 14:00
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA
Organization Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
Adverse Effects of CEO Family-to-Work Conflict on Firm
Performance
Christopher S. Reina, Suzanne J. Peterson, Zhen Zhang
To cite this article:
Christopher S. Reina, Suzanne J. Peterson, Zhen Zhang (2017) Adverse Effects of CEO Family-to-Work Conflict on Firm
Performance. Organization Science 28(2):228-243. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2017.1114
Full terms and conditions of use: http://pubsonline.informs.org/page/terms-and-conditions
This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use
or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher
approval, unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.
The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or
support of claims made of that product, publication, or service.
Copyright © 2017, INFORMS
Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages
INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research, management
science, and analytics.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.orgORGANIZATION SCIENCE
Vol. 28, No. 2, March–April 2017, pp. 228–243
ISSN 1047-7039 (print), ISSN 1526-5455 (online)
http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/orsc/
Adverse Effects of CEO Family-to-Work Conflict on
Firm Performance
Christopher S. Reina, a Suzanne J. Peterson, b Zhen Zhang c
a Department
of Management, School of Business, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23284; b Thunderbird School of
Global Management, Arizona State University, Glendale, Arizona 85306; c Department of Management and Entrepreneurship, W. P. Carey
School of Business, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287
Contact: csreina@vcu.edu (CSR); suzanne.peterson@thunderbird.asu.edu (SJP); zhen.zhang@asu.edu (ZZ)
Received: February 13, 2016
Revised: June 29, 2016; October 31, 2016
Accepted: December 15, 2016
Published Online in Articles in Advance:
March 20, 2017
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2017.1114
Copyright: © 2017 INFORMS
Abstract. We examine whether chief executive officers’ (CEOs’) experiences occurring
outside the work domain influence the performance of their respective firms. We suggest
that the family-to-work conflict (FWC) that CEOs experience depletes their ability to self-
regulate, thereby reducing their ability to make appropriately comprehensive decisions for
their firms. This reduced decision-making comprehensiveness, in turn, has negative impli-
cations for firm performance. We further propose that CEOs’ levels of job engagement,
or the extent to which they invest themselves in their work, can expand their capacity to
withstand the negative effects of self-regulatory depletion. We test our hypotheses using
a sample of 98 CEOs from the United States computer software and hardware industry.
Findings confirm that reduced decision-making comprehensiveness represents one mech-
anism by which the experience of FWC in CEOs harms the performance of their firms.
Moreover, CEO job engagement buffers both the negative effect of CEO FWC on decision-
making comprehensiveness and the strength of the indirect relationship between FWC
and firm performance via decision-making comprehensiveness.
Keywords: CEO family-to-work conflict • CEO decision making • firm performance • CEO job engagement
Introduction
1997, Konrad and Mangel 2000). Our study combines
both micro and macro perspectives to consider the role
that CEOs’ home lives play in bringing about compet-
itive advantage and, as such, links FWC to firm per-
formance and specifies the mechanism by which this
relationship operates. This is an important relationship
to study given the societal tendency to see top execu-
tives as larger than life (Khurana 2002) and uniformly
highly motivated and able to achieve high levels of suc-
cess (Donaldson and Lorsch 1983). The executive-job-
demands literature states that CEOs differ from one
another in the demands placed on them (Hambrick
et al. 2005), and we extend this line of thinking by sug-
gesting that nonwork demands on CEOs are similarly
important to what ultimately occurs at work. Specif-
ically, the present study investigates whether FWC
negatively affects CEOs by diminishing their strategic
decision-making abilities, which will be particularly
detrimental for the performance of their firms. Such an
examination is significant given that there has been a
limited discussion of the mechanisms by which FWC
affects business-level outcomes such as firm perfor-
mance (Kelly et al. 2008). In short, although it makes
sense that FWC would affect the CEO and their firms
in some way, we do not yet understand why or how
this is the case.
To better answer this question, we draw on the
self-regulation (Bandura 1991, Baumeister et al. 1994,
Upper-echelons research suggests that chief executive
officers’ (CEOs’) attributes and personality traits influ-
ence strategic decision processes and actions (Miller
and Toulouse 1986, Nadkarni and Herrmann 2010,
Peterson et al. 2003, Resick et al. 2009), and have impli-
cations for firm performance (Hambrick and Mason
1984, Hambrick 2007). The research stream in upper
echelons is well developed when it comes to the per-
sonality traits that drive CEO behavior, but other fac-
tors such as personal experiences occurring outside of
the work domain have been explored far less. However,
recent work has suggested that the events that hap-
pen to CEOs outside of work have important firm-level
implications (Bennedsen et al. 2007, Dahl et al. 2012,
Liu and Yermack 2012). Motivated by this growing lit-
erature, we leverage work on executive job demands
(Hambrick et al. 2005), proposing that CEOs differ in
the levels of personal conflict they experience at home
which influence work behavior and can explain vari-
ance in firm outcomes.
There are a growing number of studies that demon-
strate the detrimental effects that family-to-work con-
flict (FWC) has on employees in general (see Amstad
et al. 2011 for a meta-analysis) and on followers of lead-
ers who experience FWC specifically (ten Brummelhuis
et al. 2013). Additionally, researchers have proposed
that effectively managing work–family issues at a firm
level can be a source of competitive advantage (Coff
228Reina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
Carver and Scheier 1981, Ryan et al. 1997) and resource-
depletion (Edwards and Rothbard 2000, Rothbard
2001) literatures to examine the cognitive process
through which the negative effects of FWC among
CEOs occurs. According to these literatures, individu-
als have a finite pool of resources which can be used up
such that they are no longer available (Eckenrode and
Gore 1990) leaving them with a limited set of resources
to cope with the demands they face (Baumeister et al.
1998, Baumeister and Vohs 2007. We theorize that FWC
reduces a CEO’s ability to self-regulate by depleting
the cognitive resources required to seek out and pro-
cess information to make informed strategic decisions.
In other words, it limits CEOs’ ability to make compre-
hensive decisions which, in turn, negatively impacts
firm performance.
We further propose that CEOs have differing
amounts of resource pools to call upon in order to ef-
fectively cope with the negative effects of FWC and
that the amount of these resources available depends
on the extent to which CEOs are fully immersed in
their work. Rothbard (2001) proposed that individuals
who experience depleting effects in the family domain
may engage more fully at work as a way of compen-
sating for the resource depletion occurring at home.
In short, we suggest that CEOs who fully engage—
that is, direct their full set of resources toward their
work role (Kahn 1990)—will be better able to function
effectively from a decision-making perspective despite
facing high amounts of FWC.
Our research makes several contributions to the lit-
erature. First, we introduce self-regulation (Carver and
Scheier 1981, Ryan et al. 1997) as an overarching frame-
work to complement our understanding of upper ech-
elons theory (Hambrick and Mason 1984, Hambrick
2007) which has traditionally been used to explain
CEO strategic action. More specifically, we introduce
the personal conflict that occurs outside of work as
one factor that can affect relevant behavior of those
within a firm’s upper echelons. We additionally build
off recent research which uses a self-regulation frame-
work to suggest that individuals opt to perform tasks
which require fewer self-regulatory resources when
they experience the depleting effects of work interfer-
ing with their home lives (i.e., work-to-family conflict,
Dahm et al. 2015). We expect similar depletion to occur
when family interferes with work responsibilities (i.e.,
family-to-work conflict). Second, we explicitly exam-
ine decision-making comprehensiveness as a cognitive
mechanism by which FWC reduces effective decision
making due to its resource depleting effects (Edwards
and Rothbard 2000). Previously, resource depletion has
been shown to reduce subsequent performance on cog-
nitive tasks (Pocheptsova et al. 2009, Vohs et al. 2005),
and further empirical tests of cognitive mechanisms
229
within the family–work literature represent an impor-
tant area for future research (e.g., Shockley and Allen
2014). We propose that an understanding of the cog-
nitive implications of FWC are particularly important
when considering senior executives. This is because
the notable and often daily decisions CEOs make have
far-reaching implications for the entire firm. Third, we
investigate whether the level of CEO job engagement
interacts with their level of FWC to ultimately pre-
dict how cognitively depleted CEOs become. CEOs
who have more work resources available due to high
engagement at work, will be better able to absorb the
negative effects of FWC and thus will become less
depleted than those CEOs who devote fewer resources
to work via low job engagement.
Theoretical Background
Decision-Making Comprehensiveness
Although multiple mechanisms exist that link work
and family domains (e.g., Rothbard 2001), we focus
primarily on the cognitive mechanism of decision mak-
ing in this study as an important determinant of firm
performance. Given that the strategy of an organi-
zation and ultimately its performance is determined
by the decisions made by top organizational lead-
ers (Fredrickson and Mitchell 1984), a focus on the
cognitive implications of CEOs experiencing FWC is
important. Strategic decision-making comprehensive-
ness refers to the extent to which firm leaders seek
out and process information from the external environ-
ment in order to make high-quality, informed strategic
decisions (Fredrickson 1984, Fredrickson and Mitchell
1984, Ireland and Miller 2004, Miller et al. 1998). It
pertains to the amount of exhaustiveness and inclu-
sivity in searching for information using “multiple
approaches, multiple courses of action, and multiple
decision criteria in evaluating and selecting alternative
courses of action” (Atuahene-Gima and Li 2004, p. 584).
In general, research on strategic decision making has
demonstrated that the more information sought out
by members of the top management team (TMT), the
more effective a firm is in staying ahead of the innova-
tion curve by realizing potential opportunities to create
new products and services (Alexiev et al. 2010).
Importantly, decision-making comprehensiveness
should not be confused with collecting information in-
definitely. In other words, decision-making speed and
quality do not represent an inevitable trade-off. In fact,
previous research has shown that fast decision mak-
ers use more, not less, information than slow deci-
sion makers and develop more, not fewer, alternatives,
thereby increasing decision quality (Eisenhardt 1989).
Therefore, it is not necessarily the case that fast decision
makers forgo information in favor of speed. Rather,
they move through the information-gathering process
faster than their slower decision-making counterparts.230
Reina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
The result is that comprehensive decision makers are
known for seeking out the optimal amount of informa-
tion (regardless of speed) before making a decision to
avoid major decision failures (Nutt 2004). This is con-
sistent with theorizing that differentiates individuals
according to whether they choose the option that max-
imizes utility or the option that is simply good enough
(Parker et al. 2007, Schwartz et al. 2002). We suggest
that decision-making comprehensiveness is similar to
behavior that maximizes utility. Maximizing utility has
been linked to positive outcomes in contexts where the
information matters a great deal in determining ulti-
mate success or failure (Schwartz et al. 2002), such as
the high-stakes decision-making situations CEOs find
themselves in daily.
Integrating Self-Regulation and CEO Psychology
with Upper Echelons
To date, the literature on CEO psychology stems from
the upper-echelons perspective, which purports that
psychological characteristics of CEOs influence impor-
tant organizational outcomes by filtering how CEOs
construe the reality of strategic situations, thus dis-
posing them toward certain choices (Finkelstein and
Hambrick 1996). Previous research has found that
CEOs differ in the amount of job demands placed on
them, which has implications for their work perfor-
mance (Hambrick et al. 2005). We extend this line of
thinking by suggesting that CEOs also differ in the
amount of personal demands placed on them from
the home domain, and that this may also have impor-
tant implications for their work performance. In doing
so, we integrate work on self-regulation and resource
drain to account for the effects of CEOs’ FWC in pre-
dicting strategic outcomes.
Self-regulation refers to individuals’ capacity to con-
trol their behaviors and to adapt these behaviors based
on a wide variety of demands (Baumeister and Vohs
2007). The self-regulatory resource approach likens the
capacity for self-regulation to a strength or energy-
based model in which individuals have limited sup-
plies of resources that can become depleted (Baumeis-
ter and Heatherton 1996). Individuals use similar
cognitive and emotional regulation resources across a
variety of tasks (Baumeister et al. 2001, Muraven et al.
1998), which means that these resources can become
depleted and thus unavailable for subsequent use. The
ability to self-regulate has been linked to positive out-
comes such as higher adjustment, interpersonal suc-
cess, and a wide variety of performance outcomes
(VandeWalle et al. 1999, see Cellar et al. 2011 for meta-
analysis). We suggest that self-regulation theory is an
especially relevant and complementary theoretical per-
spective for the upper-echelons literature to take into
account because it provides an explanatory mechanism
to understand how characteristics of CEOs beyond
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
their personality (e.g., Big 5 personality and narcis-
sism) can impact organizational outcomes. That is, self-
regulation theory offers a perspective on how other
personal factors in CEOs (e.g., nonwork demands) can
influence firm performance.
Self-regulation theory also includes a theoretical
explanation for how individuals can reduce the detri-
mental effects of cognitive depletion. First, individu-
als who are highly engaged in their jobs when ex-
periencing FWC will start from a place of having
more resources available to them to use in the work
domain even if they experience the depleting effects
of FWC. This is similar to the enrichment perspec-
tive on resources that suggests that individuals who
invest resources via engagement toward a specific
domain will experience increased resources in that do-
main, effectively building up the resource pool and
building up capacity against resource loss (Edwards
and Rothbard 2000, Rothbard 2001). In other words,
those individuals who have higher resources invested
toward work effectively expand their capacity to with-
stand the negative effects of self-regulatory depletion.
Thus, how depleted an individual becomes is a func-
tion of both how many resources the individual starts
with and the degree to which FWC drains these exist-
ing resources.
CEO Family-to-Work Conflict
Defined as the extent to which one’s work responsi-
bilities are made more difficult by family responsibili-
ties (Frone et al. 1997), FWC can refer to any situation,
positive or negative, that distracts a person from his or
her job that occurs away from work, such as care for a
sick parent, a divorce, the purchase of a home, or the
birth of a child. Given that we are explicitly interested
in understanding how CEOs’ nonwork lives affect their
work lives (and not how CEO’s work lives affect their
nonwork lives), we study FWC rather than work-to-
family conflict (Frone et al. 1997). Although there exists
some empirical work linking work–family initiatives
with firm financial performance (see Kelly et al. 2008 for
a review), research linking employees’ levels of conflict
experienced at home to firm-level outcomes is sparse,
as is discussion of the specific mediating mechanisms
that transmit these negative effects. Evidence suggests
that the events in the private lives of CEOs have impli-
cations for the firms they lead. For example, research
has demonstrated that future company performance
deteriorated after CEOs purchased mega-mansions or
extremely lavish homes (Liu and Yermack 2012), that
the death of a CEO’s family member can affect the prof-
itability of the firm by up to 21.7% (Bennedsen et al.
2007), and changes in relationship status correspond
with higher levels of overall firm riskiness (Nicolosi
and Yore 2015). Research also demonstrates that the
FWC experienced by leaders spills over to the work-
place and predicts both leader and follower burnoutReina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
(ten Brummelhuis et al. 2013). Previous research has
also found that FWC results in negative, emotionally
laden outcomes such as higher burnout/exhaustion,
higher hostility, lower satisfaction, and lower subjec-
tive well-being (ten Brummelhuis et al. 2011; see Eby
et al. 2005 for an overview). Individuals who expend
resources in the family domain experience drain and
depletion, which reduces the self-regulatory resources
that can then be used in the work domain and may lead
to energy loss and fatigue (Edwards and Rothbard 2000,
Rothbard 2001).
Hypothesis Development
CEO Family-to-Work Conflict and Decision-Making
Comprehensiveness
According to self-regulation theory, resource depletion
occurs when an individual experiences a reduction in
the amount of resources available (Baumeister et al.
1998, Baumeister and Vohs 2007, Vohs et al. 2005).
Given that time and strain-based stressors occur in the
family domain and require cognitive and emotional
self-regulatory resources to ensure that individuals can
successfully navigate these challenges, it follows that
these individuals will have fewer resources left for sub-
sequent self-regulation in the work domain. In other
words, since “self-regulation presumably consumes
resources because the self must override one response
and then substitute a different response, and energy
is needed to perform these interrupt and initiate func-
tions” (Vohs et al. 2008, p. 854), dealing with issues
in the family domain has depleting effects for indi-
viduals in the workplace. Extending this logic to our
study, we theorize that for CEOs experiencing FWC,
resources will be depleted as their cognitive and emo-
tional resources are spent in the family domain, which
has detrimental effects for work-related process such as
decision making.
Recent research has explicated the need to delve
deeper into the determinants of decision making
(Reynolds 2006). From the perspective of self-regulation
theory, decision making requires that individuals uti-
lize high-level cognitive processing to take into account
multidimensional information that is laden with ambi-
guities (Bandura and Jourden 1991). Emotional pro-
cessing similarly plays a prominent role in the deci-
sion-making process (Schwarz 2000) as well as the
process of self-regulation (Carver and Scheier 1990),
such that individuals who are emotionally or cog-
nitively depleted due to prior self-regulation will
have fewer resources available for subsequent self-
regulation (Vohs et al. 2005). Indeed, recent research
found that individuals who expend resources at home
during the evening experience depletion at work the
next day, which importantly suggests the longevity
of depletion effects (Lanaj et al. 2014). As a result of
this prior self-regulation in the family domain, CEOs
231
will have fewer resources to devote to decision mak-
ing such that they are likely to search less intensely
for information, rely on unidimensional logic, and
be less likely to compromise, all of which have been
shown to result in less comprehensive decisions being
made (Baumeister et al. 2008). This is also consistent
with research on resource drain and depletion such
that when finite resources are used up, they become
unavailable for future use, leading to diminished per-
formance (Eckenrode and Gore 1990, Edwards and
Rothbard 2000, Rothbard 2001) even for tasks that
occur across domains that may be separated by several
hours (Barnes et al. 2012, Lanaj et al. 2014).
These predictions are consistent with experimen-
tal research that has demonstrated that partici-
pants with depleted self-regulatory resources are less
likely than those in the control condition to think
through an issue comprehensively and instead tend
to rely on simpler, less-involved information process-
ing (Pocheptsova et al. 2009). These findings are also
aligned with the strategic-decision-making literature
which suggests that organizational decision making
is characterized by the limited cognitive capacities of
decision makers (Eisenhardt and Zbaracki 1992) and
that this bounded rationality becomes more salient
when demands on executives are high (Hambrick
et al. 2005). Bounded rationality refers to individuals’
attempts to be comprehensive in their decision making
but undoubtedly falling short due to their cognitive
limitations (Cyert and March 1963, Simon 1945). Thus,
CEOs who are experiencing high levels of demands
at home “take mental shortcuts and engage in limited
search to arrive at their choices” at work, and as more
demands are placed on executives, the “more remote
strategic rationality becomes” (Hambrick et al. 2005,
p. 478). Given that CEOs must work closely with other
TMT members to make strategic decisions for the firm
(Hambrick 2007) and that the experiences and charac-
teristics of the TMT impact strategic decision making
(Clark and Maggitti 2012), a failure to seek out infor-
mation from a variety of sources and/or an inability
to compromise due to self-regulatory depletion and
increased bounded rationality will ultimately lead to a
CEO making less comprehensive decisions. Based on
this line of reasoning, we predict the following:
Hypothesis 1. CEO family-to-work conflict is negatively
related to CEO decision-making comprehensiveness.
CEO Decision-Making Comprehensiveness and
Firm Performance
Previous research has supported a positive relation-
ship between decision-making comprehensiveness and
firm performance, rationalizing that leaders who seek
out more information and consider this information
carefully before making a decision will ultimately
make better decisions for the firms (Miller et al. 1998,232
Reina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
Priem et al. 1995). Other research has demonstrated
that the seeking out of information on behalf of TMT
members has positive implications for firm-level inno-
vation (Alexiev et al. 2010). Despite these main-effect
findings, other research has identified potential mod-
erators of the relationship between these two variables.
For example, research has shown a negative relation-
ship between these two variables when firms are in
unstable environments characterized by high uncer-
tainty (Fredrickson and Mitchell 1984) but a positive
relationship in stable environments (Fredrickson 1984).
The rationale for these moderation findings was that
for firms that must make decisions quickly, too much
comprehensiveness significantly slowed down deci-
sion speed, which ultimately compromised a firm’s
ability to keep up with competitors (Forbes 2007).
In the context of this study, the components man-
ufacturing (CM) segment of the computer hardware
industry, the environment can be characterized as rela-
tively more stable compared to the computer software
industry and to its industry counterpart, the origi-
nal equipment manufacturers (OEMs). OEMs produce
personal computers, servers, and workstations. Com-
petition is considerably more fierce on the OEMs side
of the industry compared to the companies in our sam-
ple, which are the component companies who supply
parts to the OEMs. The environment for our sampled
companies is more stable than for the OEMs because
OEMs tend to stick with one component supplier for
longer lengths of time due to long sales cycles and high
switching costs. Based on our current context, we argue
that the extent to which these firms’ CEOs seek out and
carefully analyze as much information as possible pro-
vides a critical competitive advantage over other CEOs
that take less information into account when making
important organizational decisions. These CEOs will
get very few chances to make the right decision on
how to position themselves relationally with the larger
OEMs and so they must take advantage of the infor-
mation available about their markets and customers
to be seen as credible when selling themselves and
their products. This reasoning is in line with previous
empirical and theoretical research that has argued that
in situations where analyzable information is available,
CEOs who make decisions characterized by compre-
hensiveness will achieve better performance outcomes
(Atuahene-Gima and Li 2004, Forbes 2007). This is
because analyzable information left on the table will
confer a competitive advantage to other firms who
do take advantage of this information. This is simi-
lar to the argument made within the maximizing and
satisficing literature that “searching for information,
asking questions, and striving to attain the best [deci-
sion] available” (a maximizing approach) is superior
to selecting a “good enough” decision based on less
information (a satisficing approach), especially when
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
the outcome matters a great deal (Schwartz et al. 2002,
p. 1194). Following this logic, we suggest that the deci-
sion making of CEOs matters a great deal in affect-
ing the future trajectory of their firms and that those
firms whose CEOs aggressively seek out and make use
of available information will outperform those firms
whose CEOs who do not pursue comprehensive deci-
sion making. Thus, we predict the following:
Hypothesis 2. CEO decision-making comprehensiveness
is positively related to firm performance.
The Mediating Role of Decision-Making
Comprehensiveness
Our Hypothesis 1 predicts a negative relationship
between CEOs’ FWC and decision-making compre-
hensiveness, and Hypothesis 2 predicts a positive
relationship between CEOs’ decision-making compre-
hensiveness and firm performance. Taken together,
these hypotheses specify a model in which CEO FWC
affects firm performance through influencing of the
CEOs’ strategic decision-making process. This notion
is in line with self-regulation theory (Bandura 1991,
Baumeister et al. 1994, Carver and Scheier 1981).
Specifically, when individuals invest valuable cog-
nitive and psychological resources in self-regulation
activities in the family domain, these resources are
not available for self-regulation activities in the work
domain. At the level of CEOs, decreased ability to
self-regulate is detrimental for decision-making com-
prehensiveness; in turn, this detriment ultimately con-
tributes to decreased firm performance (Eisenhardt
1989, Priem et al. 1995). Accordingly, we anticipate that
CEO decision-making comprehensiveness carries the
effect of CEO FWC on firm performance. Following
Mathieu and Taylor (2006), we thus predict an indirect
relationship:
Hypothesis 3. CEO family-to-work conflict has a negative
indirect effect on firm performance via the mediating effect of
CEO decision-making comprehensiveness.
The Moderating Role of CEO Job Engagement
Job engagement represents a “relatively enduring state
of mind referring to the simultaneous investment of
personal energies in the experience of performance
of work” (Christian et al. 2011, p. 95) and holistically
accounts for individuals’ simultaneous investment of
cognitive, emotional, and physical energy into their
work roles (May et al. 2004, Kahn 1990, Rich et al. 2010).
According to the strength or capacity model of self-
regulation (Baumeister and Heatherton 1996), indi-
viduals have a limited amount of resources available
to utilize throughout the day, and these can become
depleted (Eckenrode and Gore 1990, Edwards and
Rothbard 2000). This is similar to the analogy of a
battery—the capacity of the battery at a given timeReina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
represents the amount of resources available to be har-
nessed. Extending the battery analogy to the realm
of the CEO, we suggest that CEOs who commit high
amounts of resources to work via engagement effec-
tively have higher-capacity batteries to harness at work.
Conservation of resource (COR) (Hobfoll 1989, 2002)
theory posits that individuals utilize the resources they
have to further guard against the loss of resources. In
this study, we hypothesize that job engagement repre-
sents an important resource which CEOs can harness
to protect or buffer themselves from the further loss
of resources. The self-regulatory depletion or “load”
that high levels of FWC puts on the battery will then
not result in the battery running down as quickly as
it would if the amount of work resources stemming
from fully engaging at work were less (i.e., CEOs who
engage less fully at work have lower-capacity batter-
ies to draw from at work). We thus propose that job
engagement at work increases total available resources
rather than serving to further deplete resources, con-
sistent with theoretical (Hobfoll 1989, 2002) and empir-
ical work which has found that job engagement can act
as a resource to buffer against the depletive effects of
working long hours (ten Brummelhuis et al. 2016). In
other words, although FWC may deplete resources and
negatively affect CEOs, those CEOs who have ample
resources available at work due to their high level of job
engagement will not become as depleted as quickly—
similar to how a fully charged battery will not run
down as quickly as a half-charged battery.
Research on executive job demands proposes that
despite the commonly held idea that CEOs are all sim-
ilar in their motivation to perform and in their aspi-
rations for high levels of success, this is not the case
(Hambrick et al. 2005). Conversely, CEOs may be moti-
vated simply to maintain their organizations or to per-
form “merely credibly” rather than to deliver maxi-
mum organizational performance. This is an important
point, because it suggests that CEOs, like all workers,
may differ in the ultimate level of engagement they
bring to work and the capacity they have to draw from
due to how they have invested their energy. When it
comes to strategic decision making, CEOs who expe-
rience significant demands placed on them (such as
high levels of FWC) will rely on the resources they
have available to them, and those CEOs who already
have an expanded pool of energy resources via engage-
ment will be better able to combat the draining effects
of these high demands. In other words, what hap-
pens at home may deplete a CEO’s resources and affect
his or her work performance, but the net depletion of
cognitive resources at work is a function of both the
total resources invested at work (capacity of the bat-
tery represented by job engagement) and the level of
drain put on the battery (represented by FWC). Sup-
porting the enriching (rather than depleting) effect of
233
resources, previous research has demonstrated that it
is possible for individuals to both experience high lev-
els of negative emotions from the family domain and
simultaneously maintain high levels of absorption or
engagement in work (Rothbard 2001), and that high
levels of job engagement can ultimately buffer individ-
uals from the negative health effects of workaholism
(ten Brummelhuis et al. 2016).
CEOs who have high job engagement have ample
reservoirs of cognitive, emotional, and physical capac-
ity to harness. Engaging physically is akin to CEOs
consciously putting increased time and effort into their
work. When engaging cognitively, CEOs are attentive,
vigilant, and focused. By engaging emotionally, CEOs
focus their feelings and emotional energy toward their
work. When all three facets work together synergisti-
cally, CEOs are fully engaged and have more capacity
to protect against the resource drain so that they do not
reach a level of critical depletion as quickly. In other
words, the level of CEO job engagement represents
the size of the battery CEOs have available to use for
their daily tasks as a CEO and thus buffers them from
the negative effects of resource depletion. If CEOs are
highly engaged and thus have high levels of cognitive,
emotional, and physical resources available through-
out the day (i.e., a large capacity), the net negative
effect of FWC as a resource drain will be less, and they
will be less likely to have their battery reach a critically
low level where their decision-making comprehensive-
ness would suffer. Further, we build off of research
demonstrating that engagement at work can lead to
more resources being created (such as positive affect),
which can then have important implications for indi-
viduals’ home lives (Rothbard 2001). In other words,
work engagement expands total resources available for
subsequent use, supporting an enriching (rather than
depleting) effect of engagement on resource reserves.
In sum, we hypothesize the following:
Hypothesis 4. The relationship between CEO family-to-
work conflict and decision-making comprehensiveness is
moderated by CEO job engagement. Specifically, the nega-
tive relationship between family-to-work conflict and deci-
sion-making comprehensiveness is stronger for CEOs who
have low job engagement than for CEOs who have high job
engagement.
We have hypothesized an indirect relationship be-
tween CEO FWC and firm performance via decision-
making comprehensiveness (Hypotheses 1–3). We then
hypothesized that CEO job engagement will moder-
ate the relationship between CEO FWC and decision-
making comprehensiveness (Hypothesis 4). Taken
together, we expect that CEO job engagement will mod-
erate the indirect relationship between CEO FWC and
firm performance via decision-making comprehensive-
ness, thereby demonstrating a pattern of first-stage234
Reina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
moderated mediation Edwards and Lambert (2007).
We expect that CEO FWC is more likely to negatively
and indirectly relate to firm performance (via decision-
making comprehensiveness) in situations when the
first-stage relationship is more negative (i.e., when CEO
job engagement is low). We thus expect the following:
Hypothesis 5. CEO job engagement moderates the strength
of the indirect relationship between CEO family-to-work con-
flict and firm performance (via decision-making comprehen-
siveness). Specifically, the indirect effect of family-to-work
conflict on firm performance is more negative when CEOs’
job engagement is lower rather than higher.
Method
Sample and Procedure
We collected data from both CEOs and their chief
financial officers (CFOs) from 98 computer software
and hardware companies based across a three-state
region of the western United States. Seventy-nine per-
cent of the firms were privately held with a mean
firm age of 12.1 years. A majority of the firms were
small- to medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), and their
sizes ranged from fewer than 50 employees to more
than 1,000 employees. Among the 98 CEOs, 26% were
founders of their respective companies. This sample
was part of a broader data-collection effort which took
place over a three-year period and examined executive
leadership. Each financial quarter, CEOs were invited
to attend an industry consortium held by a network-
ing organization and sponsored by a large technology
firm. The purpose of the consortium was to provide
a forum for peer networking, innovation, and topical-
information sharing. Each firm’s CFO also attended
one meeting per year, primarily for discussions around
best practices in the financial realm. Based on an exist-
ing relationship with a member of the sponsoring orga-
nization, one of the authors was invited to present a
short speech to kick off each quarterly event and then
allowed to distribute surveys.
We collected data on-site during three consecu-
tive quarterly conferences. During each time period,
a member of the research team personally adminis-
tered a survey to the participants. The researcher ver-
bally encouraged voluntary participation, assured con-
fidentiality, and promised to supply a complementary
executive summary of the findings. During this ini-
tial time period (Time 1), CEOs responded to survey
items measuring their job engagement, their own sub-
jective assessment of how their firm was performing
as of the date of the survey, and demographic char-
acteristics, such as tenure as CEO, gender, age, marital
status, and number of children. The second wave of data
collection occurred three months later (Time 2). Dur-
ing this time period, CEOs responded to survey items
measuring the degree to which they experienced FWC.
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
Three months after the second data collection (Time 3),
the CFOs responded to survey items evaluating their
CEOs’ decision-making comprehensiveness and their own
demographic information. Finally, with the permission
of the CEOs, we obtained objective firm performance data
for the two quarters after data collection (Time 4). Con-
sortium organizers had this information on file and
provided this data to us upon request and with guar-
antees of confidentiality.
Our initial pool consisted of a total of 308 CEOs who
were initially invited to attend these meetings; how-
ever, some CEOs did not attend or attended some meet-
ings but not others. We dropped CEOs from the sample
if they did not complete either the Time 1 or Time 2
surveys, or if their CFOs did not complete the Time 3
survey. Although 215 CEOs completed the Time 1 and
Time 2 surveys, we were left with a total of 98 CEOs
and their respective CFOs who completed all aspects
of the data-collection process (an overall response rate
of 32%). Subsequent analyses revealed no significant
differences in terms of any of the gathered study vari-
ables between the CEOs who were dropped from the
sample and those who remained. In our sample of
98 CEOs, approximately 89.8% were male and 76.5%
were Caucasian, and they ranged in age from 32 to 63
years, with a mean age of 46.36 years. Of the CFOs,
93.9% were male and 54.5% were Caucasian, and they
ranged in age from 32 to 58 years, with a mean age of
43.7 years.
Measures
Family-to-Work Conflict. We asked the CEOs to report
their own FWC over the past year by using six items
from the measure of FWC of Carlson et al. (2000). This
measure assesses three distinct dimensions of FWC:
time-based, strain-based, and behavior-based conflict
using nine items. Sample items include “The time I
spent on family responsibilities often interfered with
my work responsibilities” (time-based) and “Because I
was often stressed from family responsibilities, I had
a hard time concentrating on my work” (strain-based).
We limited the items to the six items that assess the
time and strain forms of FWC and excluded the three
behavior-based items based on feedback from the con-
ference planning committee (who were also CEOs) that
these items lacked relevance to our CEO sample (sam-
ple item: “The behaviors I use to respond to inter-
personal problems at work perform better at home
than at work”). The six items were on a five-point Lik-
ert scale ranging from 1  “strongly disagree” to 5 
“strongly agree.” We computed the FWC score as the
mean across items (α  0.98).
Decision-Making Comprehensiveness. It is widely
recognized that the CEO and CFO relationship is one
of the most important in any company because the
CEO and CFO must work in concert to make decisionsReina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
and implement strategy. Research from the finance
and accounting literatures concurs with this view and
has suggested that the CEO and the CFO are inex-
tricably linked (Hennes et al. 2008, Jiang et al. 2010)
such that “CFOs have now been legislatively elevated
to the same level of financial oversight responsibility
as was formerly viewed as the responsibility of the
CEO” (Geiger and North 2006, p. 782). We thus asked
the CFO to evaluate the CEO’s decision-making compre-
hensiveness due to the extent to which the CFO has
insight into the daily operations of the organization
and is often seen at their confidant (Katz 2011). Given
that our goal was to capture the between-CEO differ-
ences in overall decision-making comprehensiveness, we
asked the CFO to evaluate the CEOs decision-making
comprehensiveness over the past year using the five-item
scale of Miller et al. (1998), which was recently used
and validated by Souitaris and Maestro (2010). Sample
items include “When faced with an immediate, impor-
tant, non-routine threat or opportunity, the CEO usu-
ally develops many alternative responses” and “The
CEO considers many different criteria and issues when
deciding the course of action to take.” These items were
on a five-point Likert scale ranging from 1  “strongly
disagree” to 5  “strongly agree.” We computed the
decision-making comprehensiveness score as the mean
across items (α  0.89).
Job Engagement. We asked CEOs to rate their level
of job engagement over the past year using the 18-item
scale of Rich et al. (2010). Using a one-year refer-
ence window is consistent with capturing engagement
as a relatively enduring, stable trait (Christian et al.
2011). CEOs responded on a five-point Likert scale
(1  “strongly disagree,” 5  “strongly agree”). Exam-
ple items include, over the past year: “I have felt ener-
getic in my job” and “I have been interested in my job”
(emotional engagement), “At work, I have focused a
great deal of attention on my job” and “At work, I have
concentrated on my job” (cognitive engagement), and
“I have exerted my full effort to my job” and “I have
tried my hardest to perform well on my job” (physical
engagement). We averaged the 18 items to obtain the
score for job engagement (α  0.97).
Firm Performance. Objective data on firm financial
performance was obtained from the consortium in the
form of a standard accounting-based measure—return
on assets (ROA). In line with prior recommendations,
we calculated an average ROA over two quarters after
survey data collection to reduce bias caused by single-
quarter outliers (Agle et al. 1999, Cannella et al. 2008).
Control Variables. To rule out alternative explana-
tions, we controlled for several CEO demographic vari-
ables such as gender (1  female and 0  male), age,
marital status (1  married and 0  other), and number
of children. We selected these variables because prior
235
research has shown that they significantly relate to con-
flict between the work and family domains (Michel
et al. 2010). Additionally, we controlled for founder sta-
tus (1  founder and 0  nonfounder) and tenure as
CEO because past research has demonstrated a positive
relationship between CEO tenure and firm performance
(Waldman et al. 2001). CEO tenure was measured as the
number of years a CEO had held the position up to the
time of data collection (Herrmann and Datta 2002).
Following previous researchers (Ling et al. 2008,
Waldman et al. 2001), we also included prior firm per-
formance and firm size as control variables. Prior firm
performance has been shown to affect subsequent per-
formance (Chen et al. 2009). Due to the unavailability
of objective firm performance information for quarters
prior to measuring FWC, we measured prior firm per-
formance in the Time 1 survey using CEO subjective
ratings. The use of subjective performance measures is
relatively common, with some recent estimations that
approximately one-quarter of the studies in top man-
agement journals during a two-year period utilized a
measure of subjective organizational performance (see
Richard et al. 2009). Additionally, researchers suggest
that there is some level of equivalence between the
findings for subjective and objective firm performance
measures (Dess and Robinson 1984, Wall et al. 2004).
CEOs responded to the following question “Com-
pared to peers how well do you think your com-
pany is performing?” on a five-point Likert scale (1 
“Somewhat worse than peers” to 5  “Somewhat better
than peers”). Firm size was a categorical variable mea-
suring the total number of employees (1  less than 10,
2  10 to 49, 3  50 to 99, 4  100 to 250, and 5  greater
than 500).
Analytic Strategy
We conducted confirmatory factor analyses (CFAs) to
examine the discriminant validity of the two CEO-
reported variables (i.e., FWC and job engagement). Hier-
archical regressions were used to test our hypotheses.
We grand-mean centered the predictor and the mod-
erator when testing our moderation hypotheses. We
tested for first-stage moderated mediation by exam-
ining the indirect effects at high versus low levels of
the moderator (Edwards and Lambert 2007) and their
95% Monte Carlo bootstrapped confidence intervals
(Preacher and Selig 2012).
Results
The descriptive statistics and correlations of all study
variables are shown in Table 1. Married CEOs tend to
have greater FWC (r  0.28, p < 0.01) that, in turn, is
negatively related to decision-making comprehensiveness
(r  −0.36, p < 0.001) and firm performance (r  −0.53,
p < 0.001). Both FWC (SD  1.67) and job engagement
(SD  0.95) show substantial variations in the sample.Reina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
236
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
Table 1. Means, Standard Deviations, and Correlations Among Study Variables
Variable
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
Mean
CEO gender a
0.10
Age
46.36
Marital status b
0.58
Number of children
2.08
CEO tenure
5.43
Founder status c
0.26
Firm size
3.07
Prior firm performance
4.05
Family-to-work conflict (FWC)
3.60
Job engagement
3.31
Decision-making comprehensiveness 3.34
Firm performance
10.14
SD 1 2 3 4
0.30
6.11
0.50
1.03
3.17
0.44
1.38
0.91
1.67
0.95
0.82
2.88 0.11
−0.05
−0.09
0.07
0.04
0.00
0.02
−0.17
0.05
−0.08
0.06 0.08
0.19
0.01
−0.12
−0.01
0.01
0.06
0.10
−0.02
−0.02 0.37 ∗∗∗
−0.06
−0.02
0.06
−0.11
0.28 ∗∗
−0.17
−0.05
−0.26 ∗∗ −0.08
−0.14
−0.11
−0.08
0.08
−0.22 ∗
−0.02
−0.08
5
6
0.33 ∗∗
−0.15 −0.25 ∗
0.10 0.10
−0.04 −0.05
−0.03 0.01
−0.18 −0.05
−0.09 −0.03
7
8
9
−0.11
0.24 ∗ −0.33 ∗∗ (0.98)
−0.08 0.17 −0.31 ∗∗
−0.16 0.17 −0.36 ∗∗∗
−0.08 0.30 ∗∗ −0.53 ∗∗∗
10 11
(0.94)
0.39 ∗∗∗
0.36 ∗∗∗ (0.89)
0.56 ∗∗∗
Note. Reliability coefficients are reported along the diagonal when available.
N  98.
a
1  female; 0  male.
b
1  currently married; 0  other.
c
1  founder; 0  nonfounder.
∗
p < 0.05; ∗∗ p < 0.01; ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
Discriminant Validity
We conducted CFAs on CEO-reported items measur-
ing FWC and job engagement. To achieve an optimal
ratio of sample size versus the number of estimated
parameters, we followed recommendations from pre-
vious research (e.g., Little et al. 2002) to randomly
combine the six items for FWC into three parcels. We
assigned the 18 items of job engagement into 3 parcels
representing the subdimensions (emotional, cognitive,
and physical engagement). We first ran a two-factor
model that included both variables and then compared
it against a one-factor model. The hypothesized two-
factor model fit the data well (χ 2  5.65, df  8, p > 0.68,
CFI  1.00, TLI  1.00, RMSEA  0.00) and significantly
better than the single-factor model (χ 2  264.55, df  9,
p < 0.001, CFI  0.64, TLI  0.41, RMSEA  0.54, ∆χ 2 
258.90, ∆df  1, p < 0.001). In addition, all factor load-
ings of the two-factor model were of high magnitudes
and significant (p < 0.001), showing that CEO FWC and
job engagement are distinct constructs.
Hypothesis Tests
Table 2 shows the hierarchical regression results.
When predicting decision-making comprehensiveness, we
entered the variables in three steps. First, we entered
the control variables. Second, we entered the main
effects of FWC and job engagement. Third, we entered
the interaction term. We used four steps when pre-
dicting firm performance: (1) control variables, (2) FWC,
job engagement, (3) decision-making comprehensiveness,
and (4) the interaction term between FWC and job
engagement.
Hypothesis 1 suggested a negative relationship be-
tween FWC and decision-making comprehensiveness. As
shown in Model 2 of Table 2, FWC is negatively related
to decision-making comprehensiveness (β  −0.27, p < 0.05)
after partialling out the effects of control variables and
job engagement. Thus, Hypothesis 1 was supported.
For Hypothesis 2, we expected a positive relationship
between decision-making comprehensiveness and firm per-
formance. As shown in Model 6 of Table 2, after con-
trolling for the control variables as well as FWC and job
engagement, decision-making comprehensiveness was pos-
itively related to firm performance (β  0.41, p < 0.001).
Therefore, Hypothesis 2 was supported. Hypothesis 3
predicted that there is a negative indirect effect of FWC
on firm performance via decision-making comprehensive-
ness. To test this indirect effect, we first compared Mod-
els 5 and 6 in Table 2. After decision-making comprehen-
siveness was entered in the regression, the standard-
ized coefficient of FWC in predicting firm performance
was reduced from −0.40 (p < 0.001) to −0.29 (p < 0.01).
Additionally, we multiplied the unstandardized coeffi-
cients for the first path (path a  −0.13, s.e.  0.05, p <
0.05, based on Model 2 of Table 2) and the second path
(path b  1.44, s.e.  0.30, p < 0.001, based on Model 6
of Table 2) to obtain the indirect effect estimate (a × b 
−0.19). The 95% Monte Carlo bootstrapped confidence
interval of the indirect effect excluded zero (CI  −0.37,
−0.04). Overall, these findings supported Hypothesis 3.
Hypothesis 4 predicted that job engagement moder-
ated the relationship between FWC and decision-making
comprehensiveness. As shown in Model 3 of Table 2,
the interaction term was significant (β  0.21, p < 0.05)
when predicting decision-making comprehensiveness. The
interaction term explained an additional 4% of the vari-
ance in decision-making comprehensiveness (∆R 2  0.04,
p < 0.05). To depict this moderating effect, we cal-
culated the unstandardized simple slopes when job
engagement was one standard deviation above and
below the mean (i.e., high and low conditions, respec-
tively). As shown in Figure 1, when CEO job engagementReina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
237
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
Table 2. Hierarchical Regression Results for Hypothesis Testing
Decision-making comprehensiveness
Model 1
CEO gender
Age
Marital status
Number of children
CEO tenure
Founder status
Firm size
Prior firm performance
Family-to-work conflict (FWC)
Job engagement
FWC × Job engagement
−0.07
0.00
−0.02
−0.06
−0.21
−0.05
−0.19 ∗
0.17
Decision-making comprehensiveness
R 2
∆R 2
0.11
Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7
−0.12
−0.03
0.07
0.00
−0.17
−0.04
−0.10
0.05
−0.27 ∗
0.31 ∗ −0.12
−0.03
0.07
−0.02
−0.19
−0.03
−0.14
0.04
−0.19
0.34 ∗∗
0.21 ∗ 0.05
−0.01
−0.24 ∗
0.03
−0.14
−0.04
−0.07
0.29 ∗∗ −0.02
−0.01
−0.13
0.07
−0.11
−0.02
0.03
0.15
−0.40 ∗∗∗
0.21 ∗ 0.03
0.00
−0.16
0.07
−0.04
0.00
0.08
0.13
−0.29 ∗∗
0.08 0.03
0.00
−0.16
0.07
−0.04
0.00
0.08
0.13
−0.30 ∗∗
0.08
−0.03
0.32 ∗∗∗
0.04 ∗ 0.17 ∗∗ 0.37 ∗∗∗
0.19 ∗∗∗ 0.41 ∗∗∗
0.49 ∗∗∗
0.12 ∗∗∗
0.28 ∗∗∗
0.17 ∗∗∗
0.42 ∗∗∗
0.49 ∗∗∗
0.12 ∗∗ a
Note. Standardized coefficients are reported.
a
This value of ∆R 2 was a comparison between Model 7 and Model 5 (rather than Model 6). The unstandardized coefficient for FWC in
Model 2 is −0.13 (s.e.  0.05, p < 0.05). The unstandardized coefficient for decision-making comprehensiveness is 1.44 (s.e.  0.30, p < 0.001) in
Model 6 and 1.46 (s.e.  0.31, p < 0.001) in Model 7. These unstandardized coefficients were used in calculating the indirect effects.
∗
p < 0.05; ∗∗ p < 0.01; ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
is high, FWC is not related to decision-making comprehen-
siveness (b  0.01, n.s.). In contrast, the relationship is
significant and negative when job engagement is low (b 
−0.19, p < 0.01). These results supported Hypothesis 4.
Table 3 shows the results for testing Hypothesis 5
(first-stage moderated mediation). For this test, the sim-
ple slopes of the first-stage path were based on Model 3,
and the second-stage path coefficient was from Model 7
of Table 2. As compared with Model 6, Model 7 has
the interaction term between FWC and CEO job engage-
ment added as a control for predicting firm performance
and thus is more appropriate for testing the moderated
mediation effect. As shown in Table 3, the indirect effect
of FWC via decision-making comprehensiveness is signifi-
cantly negative (a × b  −0.28, bootstrapped 95% CI 
−0.51, −0.10) when CEO job engagement is low. The indi-
Figure 1. Moderating Effect of CEO Job Engagement

Variable
Firm performance
BReina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
238
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
Table 3. Indirect Effects of Family-to-Work Conflict on Firm Performance via Decision-Making Comprehensiveness
High CEO job engagement
Low CEO job engagement
Difference between indirect effects
Path a (s.e.) Path b (s.e.) Indirect effect a × b 95% CI
0.01 (0.07)
−0.19 ∗∗ (0.06) 1.46 ∗∗∗ (0.31)
1.46 ∗∗∗ (0.31) 0.01
−0.28 ∗∗
0.29 ∗∗ (−0.20, 0.22)
(−0.51, −0.10)
(0.03, 0.62)
Note. Unstandardized coefficients and their standard errors reported in the first two columns were used to calculate the indirect effect and the
Monte Carlo bootstrapped confidence intervals (CIs).
∗∗
p < 0.01; ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.
CEO attributes and experiences influence firm perfor-
mance or which factors influence individuals’ ability to
make strategic decisions. Our study extends research
on top executives by explaining how a unique CEO psy-
chological experience ultimately influences firm per-
formance. Finally, we introduce self-regulation theory
into the upper-echelons realm as a framework that
complements the CEO psychology perspective. We
argue that while the CEO psychology perspective pro-
vides an ideal foundation to explain how personality
characteristics influence strategic action and ultimately
firm performance, self-regulation theory provides a
similar foundation to explain how a CEO’s personal
experiences can influence the same variables. Future
work should integrate the two perspectives in the
same study to explore whether such a complement
exists. Given that researchers often use self-regulation
theory to explain the process mediators between
individuals’ traits and their performance outcomes
(e.g., VandeWalle et al. 1999), self-regulation theory
may be able to explain the mechanisms by which
demography and personality characteristics translate
to organizational outcomes. For example, what are
the self-regulatory processes involved when narcissis-
tic CEOs make decisions? In our view, the CEO psy-
chology perspective and self-regulation theory account
for both the personality characteristics and the expe-
riences of top executives which together provide a
powerful approach to understand how executives ulti-
mately impact their firms.
Second, regarding the work–family literature, the
majority of studies have emphasized consequences of
FWC while ignoring the mechanisms linking FWC to
outcomes or focused on the effect of work–family ini-
tiatives (rather than conflict) on firm-level performance
(e.g., Kelly et al. 2008). The current study contributes
to the FWC literature by explicating decision-making
comprehensiveness as one mechanism by which FWC
leads to negative outcomes for CEOs and demon-
strates the significant indirect relationship between
FWC and an objective, accounting-based measure of
organizational performance. This implication is rele-
vant to the future of FWC research given that the
ability to explain and predict performance differences
between individuals and firms is important to both
the organizational behavior and strategic management
fields. Past research has emphasized the importance
of accounting for cognitive mechanisms of depletion
such as attention and engagement which have cogni-
tive components (e.g., Rothbard 2001), and the current
study further contributes to the work–family literature
by testing a specific cognitive mechanism that explains
how FWC operates in affecting firm-level outcomes.
Moreover, future research should determine whether
decision-making comprehensiveness serves as a link
between FWC and individual or group level perfor-
mance at lower organizational levels and compare the
effect of cognitive depletion with other types of deple-
tion such as emotional depletion or burnout (which has
typically been the focus of FWC among lower organi-
zational employees).
Also relevant to the FWC literature is the applica-
tion of self-regulation theory. Our study suggests that
self-regulation theory is useful in accounting for cogni-
tive resource depletion (e.g., decision-making compre-
hensiveness) and thus offers a theoretical framework
and empirical examination of the effect of FWC on
CEO self-regulation. Our study complements a recent
study by Dahm et al. (2015) which similarly uses a self-
regulatory framework to explain the negative effects of
work–family conflict on performance by demonstrating
that individuals who experience more work-to-family
conflict may tend to “take the easier road” (p. 783)
in that they select work tasks that involve fewer cog-
nitive demands after prior self-regulatory depletion.
While previous studies have considered work–family
issues from the perspective of resource depletion (e.g.,
Grandey and Cropanzano 1999), the current study as
well as the recent work of Dahm et al. (2015) contribute
to the work–family literature by studying the effects
of specific behaviors and processes (decision-making
comprehensiveness and time allocation, respectively)
that are affected when self-regulatory resources are
depleted.
Third, our work reinforces the idea that job engage-
ment may be overlooked as a key buffer that insu-
lates individuals from the detrimental effects of FWC.
Specifically, CEOs who are highly engaged have sig-
nificant physical, emotional, and cognitive resources
invested at work and thus are better able to absorb the
negative effects of FWC. Using a car battery analogy,
CEOs who have a fully charged battery at work canReina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
withstand more stress and strain put on them from
other demands and still maintain an adequate level of
performance. To extend the analogy further, a healthy
battery with strong capacity can start up an engine
despite being strained significantly when the car is left
outside in the elements and even if it has not been
started recently, whereas a car battery that has less
capacity would likely fail to start the engine. CEOs who
are highly engaged at work identify strongly with their
role as CEO and are operating at full capacity, which
allows them to endure higher drains on their energy
reservoir without reaching critically depleted levels.
Our findings complement previous work supporting
the buffering effect of engagement on the relationship
between workaholism and metabolic syndrome (ten
Brummelhuis et al. 2016) and work supporting the role
of engagement as a resource that enriches performance
through the creation of more resources (Rothbard
2001). In sum, work engagement measured as a trait-
like construct represents full immersion at work (e.g.,
Kahn 1990), and those CEOs who are fully immersed
at work become less depleted when experiencing high
levels of FWC. 1 Our finding that job engagement can
serve as buffer of FWC contributes to the broader dis-
cussion of the resources that individuals can utilize to
replenish diminishing resources or buffer themselves
against further resource loss (Hobfoll 2002). Future
research should consider how other trait-like personal-
ity characteristics such as the values CEOs hold about
the importance of family versus work (Carlson and
Kacmar 2000), and the motives CEOs have for invest-
ing in work and family roles (Rothbard and Edwards
2003), can further explain how CEOs ultimately can
protect themselves from resource loss and replenish
their resources when they become depleted.
A final area of implication relates to the strate-
gic decision-making literature. Despite the importance
of CEO decision making to the bottom line of their
firms, few studies have explored the drivers of CEO
decision making (see Papadakis et al. 1998 for a
notable exception). Our study uses a self-regulation
lens to argue that when a CEO’s ability to self-
regulate is compromised, cognitive resources will be
drained and decision-making comprehensiveness will
suffer. Future research should examine whether self-
regulation theory is applicable to other areas of deci-
sion making or other areas of strategic action (e.g., risk
taking). For example, will self-regulatory depletion
also affect decision-making speed? We would hypothe-
size that in the absence of cognitive resources, decision
speed would increase. However, based on the work of
Eisenhardt (1989), this would not necessarily be a bad
thing, as this work suggests that an increase in speed
does not mean quality inevitably will suffer. Said dif-
ferently, fast decision makers may still make very com-
prehensive decisions, they just search for information
239
at a faster rate. Future work should delve deeper into
the implications of both decision speed and compre-
hensiveness in the same study. Further, future research
should examine how self-regulatory depletion may
have important implications for CEO risk taking.
Practical Implications
Broadly speaking, this study illuminates the need for
organizations to help CEOs identify, deal with, and
ultimately reduce FWC. Our research provides pre-
liminary evidence that CEOs who experience conflict
from the family domain lead firms that are less suc-
cessful financially than those who have less FWC.
Given the financial stake for organizations, practi-
tioners must proactively work to recognize and then
address FWC in CEOs. Currently, the most commonly
utilized development option for CEOs is executive
coaching. However, such coaching is generally focused
solely on solving challenges in the work domain and is
meant to be highly confidential. Therefore, issues with
the family domain either are never broached or are
never brought to the organization’s attention. Perhaps
resources should be committed to providing CEOs
with other, more holistic development options (e.g.,
life coaching) that are more suited to addressing the
spillover between family and work.
Second, our results provide some empirical sup-
port for the practical assertion made in Charan and
Colvin’s (1999) now classic Fortune magazine article
“Why CEOs Fail.” The authors suggest that one of the
key reasons CEOs fail is that they do not seek infor-
mation from multiple sources. It is often the case that
others around the CEO recognize the existence of prob-
lems but that their voices go unheard. This has detri-
mental effects for the firm because the CEO does not
solicit information from these individuals and thus he
or she cannot utilize their important insight. Given the
positive relationship we observed between decision-
making comprehensiveness and firm performance, it is
important that CEOs seek out information from a wide
variety of sources and do not take shortcuts with their
decision making. Third, our findings demonstrate that
high job engagement can buffer CEOs from the harm-
ful effects of FWC. To ensure that firms (at least those
in the high-technology industry) perform well against
competitors, their boards of directors should be just as
interested in examining the personalities and personal
stressors of CEOs as they are in examining their work
experience or education, as all aspects may influence
a firm’s bottom line. Fourth, our results suggest that
for firms competing in environments with analyzable
information present, comprehensive decision making
characterized by careful analysis, synthesis, and the
weighing of pros and cons for each decision should be
encouraged among CEOs and TMTs as it has positive
implications for the financial performance of the firm.240
Reina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
Limitations and Future Research Directions
Our study has multiple strengths including the use
of primary CEO data collected from different sources
at multiple points in time. However, this study is not
without its limitations. Despite our conclusion that the
experience of FWC among CEOs is detrimental to the
firm, we may not be able to generalize our findings
to the broader population of all CEOs. For example,
our results could be due to some features of our par-
ticular sample (i.e., the computer industry). Although
using firms from one industry provides a natural con-
trol for industry effects that might otherwise need to be
controlled for statistically, the industry might select or
produce CEOs who experience similar levels of FWC
or make decisions for their organizations in a simi-
lar way. Although we are aware of no reason that this
would be the case, future research should replicate and
extend our findings across a broader range of CEOs,
industries, firm types, and even cultures. To further
address the generalizability of our results, similar stud-
ies should also be done in non-CEO samples. We sur-
mise that similar cognitive effects would be found with
lower-level employees. Knowing this would extend the
research on FWC by providing a deeper understanding
around the cognitive implications of FWC across mul-
tiple populations. Research should address whether
decision-making comprehensiveness reduces firm per-
formance in other industry segments. Finally, although
we considered only the one cognitive mechanism that
we believed would most likely be affected by CEO FWC
and, in turn, impact firm performance, future research
should investigate the importance of other mechanisms
such as attention, affect and mood, and time alloca-
tion (e.g., Edwards and Rothbard 2000, Rothbard 2001)
in transmitting the negative effects of FWC to firm
performance.
Our suggestion that self-regulation theory may con-
tribute to research within the realm of upper eche-
lons opens the door for researchers to ask and test
novel research questions. In this study, we look at one
potential CEO experience, FWC. Future work should
look at additional CEO experiences within the frame-
work of self-regulation theory to determine its explana-
tory power for other phenomena as well. For example,
can self-regulation theory explain the effect of work-
related experiences such as role ambiguity? Relatedly,
while we argue here that self-regulation theory offers
an explanation for the cognitive effects of FWC and
accounts for the buffering effect of job engagement,
future research should explore the effect of FWC on
both emotional and cognitive processes in tandem.
Another limitation of our work is our relatively small
sample size. Although our data collection included sur-
veying a potential pool of 308 companies, we were only
able to use 98 CEO–CFO pairs in our study. Accessing
top managers (e.g., CEOs and CFOs) is difficult due to
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
their time limitations and willingness to participate in
research studies. In comparison to prior studies on top
executives, our response rate of 32% is in the satisfac-
tory range. Future research should attempt to replicate
our findings using a larger sample of CEO–CFO pairs
to ensure that the results we obtained were not unique
to the sample we studied. Furthermore, although we
controlled for prior firm performance in an attempt to
rule out the explanation that poorly performing firms
result in the CEOs having more conflicts at home, we
cannot offer strong causal inferences. Future research
should investigate these relationships utilizing a panel
design that collects these variables repeatedly at mul-
tiple points in time to examine the potential for reverse
causality.
Future research should attempt to consider the ef-
fects of specific events that occur in the family domain
on employees’ work performance rather than rely-
ing on global perceptual judgements of FWC. This
more fine-grained approach would allow researchers
to better understand how specific life events (such as
sickness of a child, divorce, and purchase of a new
house) differentially influence a CEO’s ability to make
comprehensive decisions. In addition, future research
should seek to illuminate whether there are mediating
mechanisms that can explain the relationship between
CEO FWC and decision-making comprehensiveness.
For example, how does FWC contribute to CEOs’ mood
and their experience of emotions (Judge et al. 2006),
and subsequently, how do these relate to their abil-
ity to make comprehensive decisions? Future research
should also seek to move beyond trait-like measure-
ment of CEO FWC, decision-making comprehensiveness,
and job engagement by measuring these variables at
multiple points in time to understand how they vary
over time within CEOs, which would go beyond our
focus of predicting between-firm differences in firm
performance.
Endnote
1
As a robustness check, we tested an alternative model in which
CEO job engagement and decision-making comprehensiveness served as
two sequential mediators of the FWC–firm-performance relationship.
Path modeling results showed a nonsignificant mediation effect in
this model. We thank one anonymous reviewer for this suggestion.
References
Agle BR, Mitchell RK, Sonnenfeld JA (1999) Who matters to CEOs?
An investigation of stakeholder attributes and salience, cor-
porate performance, and CEO values. Acad. Management J.
42(5):507–525.
Alexiev AS, Jansen JJ, Van den Bosch FA, Volberda HW (2010) Top
management team advice seeking and exploratory innovation:
The moderating role of TMT heterogeneity. J. Management Stud.
47(7):1343–1364.
Amstad FT, Meier LL, Fasel U, Elfering A, Semmer NK (2011) A meta-
analysis of work-family conflict and various outcomes with
a special emphasis on cross-domain versus matching-domain
relations. J. Occupational Health Psych. 16(2):151–169.Reina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
Atuahene-Gima K, Li H (2004) Strategic decision comprehensiveness
and new product development outcomes in new technology
ventures. Acad. Management J. 47(4):583–597.
Bandura A (1991) Social cognitive theory of self-regulation. Organ.
Behav. Human Decision Processes 50(2):248–287.
Bandura A, Jourden FJ (1991) Self-regulatory mechanisms governing
the impact of social comparison on complex decision making.
J. Personality Soc. Psych. 60(6):941–951.
Barnes CM, Wagner DT, Ghumman S (2012) Borrowing from sleep
to pay work and family: Expanding time?based conflict to the
broader nonwork domain. Personnel Psych. 65(4):789–819.
Baumeister RF, Heatherton TF (1996) Self-regulation failure: An
overview. Psych. Inquiry 7(1):1–15.
Baumeister RF, Vohs KD (2007) Self-Regulation, ego depletion, and
motivation. Soc. Personality Psych. Compass 1(1):115–128.
Baumeister RF, Heatherton TF, Tice DM (1994) Losing Control: How
and Why People Fail at Self-Regulation (Academic Press, San
Diego).
Baumeister RF, Bratslavsky E, Finkenauer C, Vohs KD (2001) Bad is
stronger than good. Rev. General Psych. 5(4):323–370.
Baumeister RF, Bratslavsky E, Muraven M, Tice DM (1998) Ego deple-
tion: Is the active self a limited resource? J. Personality Soc. Psych.
74(5):1252–1265.
Baumeister RF, Sparks EA, Stillman TF, Vohs KD (2008) Free will
in consumer behavior: Self-control, ego depletion, and choice.
J. Consumer Psych. 18(1):4–13.
Bennedsen M, Pérez-González F, Wolfenzon D (2007) Do CEOs
matter? Working paper, INSEAD, Fontainebleau, France.
Calori R, Johnson G, Sarnin P (1994) CEOs’ cognitive maps and the
scope of the organization. Strategic Management J. 15(6):437–457.
Cannella AA, Park JH, Lee HU (2008) Top management team func-
tional background diversity and firm performance: Examining
the roles of team member colocation and environmental uncer-
tainty. Acad. Management J. 51(4):768–784.
Carlson DS, Kacmar KM (2000) Work-family conflict in the orga-
nization: Do life role values make a difference? J. Management
26(2):1031–1054.
Carlson DS, Kacmar KM, Williams LJ (2000) Construction and ini-
tial validation of a multidimensional measure of work–family
conflict. J. Vocational Behav. 56(2):249–276.
Carver CS, Scheier MF (1981) Attention and Self-Regulation: A Control-
Theory Approach to Human Behavior (Springer-Verlag, New York).
Carver CS, Scheier MF (1990) Principles of self-regulation. Higgins
ET, Sorrentino RM, eds. Handbook of Motivation and Cognition:
Foundations of Social Behavior, Vol. 2 (Guilford Press, New York),
3–52.
Charan R, Colvin G (1999) Why CEOs fail—It’s rarely for lack
of smarts or vision. Most unsuccessful CEOs stumble be-
cause of one simple, fatal shortcoming. Fortune Magazine
(June 21), http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune
_archive/1999/06/21/261696/index.htm.
Chen G, Kanfer R, DeShon RP, Mathieu JE, Kozlowski SWJ (2009)
The motivating potential of teams: Test and extension of Chen
and Kanfer’s (2006) cross-level model of motivation in teams.
Organ. Behav. Human Decision Processes 110(1):45–55.
Christian MS, Garza AS, Slaughter JE (2011) Work engagement:
A quantitative review and test of its relations with task and con-
textual performance. Personnel Psych. 64(1):89–136.
Cellar DF, Stuhlmacher AF, Young SK, Fisher DM, Adair CK, Haynes
S, Twichell E, et al. (2011) Trait goal orientation, self-regulation,
and performance: A meta-analysis. J. Business Psych. 26(4):
467–483.
Clark KD, Maggitti PG (2012) TMT potency and strategic
decision-making in high technology firms. J. Management Stud.
49(7):1168–1193.
Coff RW (1997) Human assets and management dilemmas: Coping
with hazards on the road to resource-based theory. Acad. Man-
agement Rev. 22(2):374–402.
Cyert RM, March JG (1963) A Behavioral Theory of the Firm (Prentice-
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ).
241
Dahl MS, Dezső CL, Ross DG (2012) Fatherhood and managerial
style: How a male CEO’s children affect the wages of his employ-
ees. Admin. Sci. Quart. 57(4):669–693.
Dahm PC, Glomb TM, Manchester CF, Leroy S (2015) Work-family
conflict and self-discrepant time allocation at work. J. Appl.
Psych. 100(3):767–792.
Dess GG, Robinson RB (1984) Measuring organizational perfor-
mance in the absence of objective measures: The case of the
privately?held firm and conglomerate business unit. Strategic
Management J. 5(3):265–273.
Donaldson G, Lorsch JW (1983) Decision Making at the Top: The Shap-
ing of Strategic Direction (Basic Books, New York).
Eby LT, Casper WJ, Lockwood A, Bordeaux C, Brinley A (2005) Work
and family research in IO/OB: Content analysis and review of
the literature (1980–2002). J. Vocational Behav. 66(1):124–197.
Eckenrode J, Gore S (1990) Stress and coping at the boundary of
work and family. Eckenrode J, Gore S, eds. Stress Between Work
and Family (Plenum, New York), 1–16.
Edwards JR, Lambert LS (2007) Methods for integrating moderation
and mediation: A general analytical framework using moder-
ated path analysis. Psych. Methods 12(1):1–22.
Edwards JR, Rothbard NP (2000) Mechanisms linking work and fam-
ily: Clarifying the relationship between work and family con-
structs. Acad. Management Rev. 25(1):178–199.
Eisenhardt KM (1989) Making fast strategic decisions in high-
velocity environments. Acad. Management J. 32(3):543–576.
Eisenhardt KM, Zbaracki MJ (1992) Strategic decision making. Strate-
gic Management J. 13(S2):17–37.
Evans M (2013) Children of rich parents suffering increased men-
tal health problems. Telegraph (November 13), http://www
.telegraph.co.uk/education/10439196/Children-of-rich-parents
-suffering-increased-mental-health-problems.html.
Finkelstein S, Hambrick D (1996) Strategic Leadership: Top Executives
and Their Effects on Organizations (West Publishing, St. Paul, MN).
Forbes DP (2007) Reconsidering the strategic implications of decision
comprehensiveness. Acad. Management Rev. 32(2):361–376.
Fredrickson JW (1984) The comprehensiveness of strategic deci-
sion processes: Extensions, observations, future directions. Acad.
Management J. 27(3):445–466.
Fredrickson JW, Mitchell TR (1984) Strategic decision making pro-
cess: Comprehensiveness and performance in an industry with
an unstable environment. Acad. Management J. 27(2):399–423.
Frone MR, Yardley JK, Markel KS (1997) Developing and testing
an integrative model of the work–family interface. J. Vocational
Behav. 50(2):145–167.
Geiger MA, North DS (2006) Does hiring a new CFO change things?
An investigation of changes in discretionary accruals. Account-
ing Rev. 81(4):781–809.
Grandey AA, Cropanzano R (1999) The conservation of resources
model applied to work–family conflict and strain. J. Vocational
Behav. 54(2):350–370.
Hambrick DC (2007) Upper echelons theory: An update. Acad. Man-
agement Rev. 32(2):334–343.
Hambrick DC, Mason PA (1984) Upper echelons: The organization
as a reflection of its top managers. Acad. Management Rev. 9(2):
193–206.
Hambrick DC, Finkelstein S, Mooney AC (2005) Executive job
demands: New insights for explaining strategic decisions and
leader behaviors. Acad. Management Rev. 30(3):472–491.
Hennes KM, Leone AJ, Miller BP (2008) The importance of distin-
guishing errors from irregularities in restatement research: The
case of restatements and CEO/CFO turnover. Accounting Rev.
83(6):1487–1519.
Herrmann P, Datta DD (2002) CEO successor characteristics and the
choice of foreign market entry mode: An empirical study. J. Inter-
nat. Bus. Stud. 33(3):551–570.
Hobfoll SE (1989) Conservation of resources: A new attempt at con-
ceptualizing stress. Amer. Psychologist 44(3):513–524.
Hobfoll SE (2002) Social and psychological resources and adaptation.
Rev. General Psych. 6(4):307–324.242
Reina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
Ireland RD, Miller CC (2004) Decision-making and firm success.
Acad. Management Exec. 18(4):8–12.
Jiang JX, Petroni KR, Wang IY (2010) CFOs and CEOs: Who have the
most influence on earnings management? J. Financial Econom.
96(3):513–526.
Judge TA, Ilies R, Scott BA (2006) Work–family conflict and emotions:
Effects at work and at home. Personnel Psych. 59(4):779–814.
Kahn WA (1990) Psychological conditions of personal engagement
and disengagement at work. Acad. Management J. 33(4):692–724.
Katz DM (2011) The CFO is the closest confidant to the CEO. CFO
Magazine (September 1), http://ww2.cfo.com/global-business/
2011/09/the-cfo-is-the-closest-confidant-to-the-ceo/.
Kelly EL, Kossek EE, Hammer LB, Durham M, Bray J, Chermack
K, Murphy LA, Kaskubar D (2008) Getting there from here:
Research on the effects of work–family initiatives on work-family
conflict and business outcomes. Acad. Management Ann. 2(1):
305–349.
Khurana R (2002) The cure of the superstar CEO. Harvard Bus. Rev.
80(9):60–66.
Konrad AM, Mangel R (2000) The impact of work-life programs on
firm productivity. Strategic Management J. 21(12):1225–1237.
Lanaj K, Johnson RE, Barnes CM (2014) Beginning the workday yet
already depleted? Consequences of late-night smartphone use
and sleep. Organ. Behav. Human Decision Processes 124(1):11–23.
Ling Y, Simsek Z, Lubatkin MH, Lyon E, Veiga JF (2008) Transforma-
tional leadership’s role in promoting corporate entrepreneur-
ship: Examining the CEO-TMT interface. Acad. Management J.
51(3):557–576.
Little TD, Cunningham WA, Shahar G, Widaman KF (2002) To parcel
or not to parcel: Exploring the question, weighing the merits.
Structural Equation Modeling J. 9(2):151–173.
Liu CH, Yermack D (2012) Where are the shareholders’ mansions?
CEOs’ home purchases, stock sales, and subsequent company
performance. Boubaker S, Nguyen BD, Nguyen DK, eds. Corpo-
rate Governance: Recent Developments and New Trends (Springer,
Berlin), 3–28.
Mathieu JE, Taylor SR (2006) Clarifying conditions and decision
points for meditational type inferences in organizational behav-
ior. J. Organ. Behav. 27(8):1031–1056.
May DR, Gilson RL, Harter LM (2004) The psychological condi-
tions of meaningfulness, safety and availability and the engage-
ment of the human spirit at work. J. Occupational Organ. Psych.
77(1):11–37.
Michel JS, Kotrba LM, Mitchelson JK, Clark MA, Baltes BB (2010)
Antecedents of work–family conflict: A meta-analytic review.
J. Organ. Behav. 32(5):689–725.
Miller CC, Burke LM, Glick WH (1998) Cognitive diversity among
upper-echelon executives: Implications for strategic decision
processes. Strategic Management J. 19(1):39–58.
Miller D, Toulouse JM (1986) Chief executive personality and cor-
porate strategy and structure in small firms. Management Sci.
32(11):1389–1409.
Muraven M, Tice DM, Baumeister RF (1998) Self-control as a limited
resource: Regulatory depletion patterns. J. Personality Soc. Psych.
74(3):774–789.
Nadkarni S, Herrmann P (2010) CEO personality, strategic flexibility,
and firm performance: The case of the Indian business process
outsourcing industry. Acad. Management J. 53(5):1050–1073.
Nicolosi J, Yore AS (2015) “I do”: Does marital status affect how much
CEOs “do”? Financial Rev. 50(1):57–88.
Nutt PC (2004) Expanding the search for alternatives during strategic
decision-making. Acad. Management Exec. 18(4):13–28.
Papadakis VM, Lioukas S, Chambers D (1998) Strategic decision
making process: The role of management and context. Strategic
Management J. 19(2):115–147.
Parker AM, De Bruin WB, Fischhoff B (2007) Maximizers versus
satisficers: Decision-making styles, competence, and outcomes.
Judgment Decision Making 2(6):342–350.
Peterson SJ, Galvin BM, Lange D (2012) CEO servant leadership:
Exploring executive characteristics and firm performance. Per-
sonnel Psych. 65(3):565–596.
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
Peterson RS, Smith DB, Martorana PV, Owens PD (2003) The impact
of chief executive officer personality on top management team
dynamics: One mechanism by which leadership affects organi-
zational performance. J. Appl. Psych. 88(5):795–808.
Pocheptsova A, Amir O, Dhar R, Baumeister RF (2009) Deciding
without resources: Resource depletion and choice in context.
J. Marketing Res. 46(3):344–355.
Preacher KJ, Selig JP (2012) Advantages of Monte Carlo confidence
intervals for indirect effects. Comm. Methods Measures 6(2):77–98.
Priem RL, Rasheed AMA, Kotulic AG (1995) Rationality in strategic
decision processes, environmental dynamism and firm perfor-
mance. J. Management 21(5):913–929.
Resick CJ, Whitman DS, Weingarden SM, Hiller NJ (2009) The bright-
side and the dark-side of CEO personality: Examining core
self-evaluations, narcissism, transformational leadership, and
strategic influence. J. Appl. Psych. 94(6):1365–1381.
Reynolds SJ (2006) A neurocognitive model of the ethical decision-
making process: Implications for study and practice. J. Appl.
Psych. 91(4):737–748.
Rich BL, Lepine JA, Crawford ER (2010) Job engagement:
Antecedents and effects on job performance. Acad. Management
J. 53(3):617–635.
Richard PJ, Devinney TM, Yip GS, Johnson G (2009) Measuring orga-
nizational performance: Towards methodological best practice.
J. Management 35(3):718–804.
Rothbard NP (2001) Enriching or depleting? The dynamics of
engagement in work and family roles. Admin. Sci. Quart. 46(4):
655–684.
Rothbard NP, Edwards JR (2003) Investment in work and family
roles: A test of identity and utilitarian motives. Personnel Psych.
56(3):699–730.
Ryan RM, Kuhl J, Deci EL (1997) Nature and autonomy:
An organizational view of social and neurobiological aspects of
self-regulation in behavior and development. Development Psy-
chopathology 9(4):701–728.
Schwarz N (2000) Emotion, cognition, and decision making. Cogni-
tion Emotion 14(4):433–330.
Schwartz B, Ward A, Monterosso J, Lyubomirsky S, White K, Lehman
DR (2002) Maximizing versus satisficing: Happiness is a matter
of choice. J. Personality Soc. Psych. 83(5):1178–1197.
Shockley KM, Allen TD (2014) Deciding between work and family:
An episodic approach. Personnel Psych. 68(2):283–318.
Simon HA (1945) Administrative Behavior (Free Press, New York).
Souitaris V, Maestro BMM (2010) Polychronicity in top manage-
ment teams: The impact on strategic decision processes and per-
formance of new technology ventures. Strategic Management J.
31(6):652–678.
ten Brummelhuis LL, Haar JM, Roche M (2013) Does family life help
to be a better leader? A closer look at crossover processes from
leaders to followers. Personnel Psych. 67(4):917–949.
ten Brummelhuis LL, Rothbard NP, Uhrich B (2016) Beyond nine to
five: Is working to excess bad for health? Acad. Management Dis-
coveries, ePub ahead of print September 23, http://dx.doi.org/
10.5465/amd.2015.0115.
ten Brummelhuis LL, ter Hoeven CL, Bakker AB, Peper B (2011)
Breaking through the loss cycle of burnout: The role of motiva-
tion. J. Occupational Organ. Psych. 84(2):268–287.
Vohs KD, Baumeister RF, Ciarocco NJ (2005) Self-regulation and self-
presentation: Regulatory resource depletion impairs impression
management and effortful self-presentation depletes regulatory
resources. J. Personality Soc. Psych. 88(4):632–657.
Vohs KD, Baumeister RF, Schmeichel BJ (2012) Motivation, per-
sonal beliefs, and limited resources all contribute to self-control.
J. Experiment. Soc. Psych. 48(4):943–947.
Vohs KD, Baumeister RF, Schmeichel BJ, Twenge JM, Nelson
NM, Tice DM (2008) Making choices impairs subsequent self-
control: A limited-resource account of decision making, self-
regulation, and active initiative. J. Personality Soc. Psych. 94(5):
883–898.Reina, Peterson, and Zhang: Adverse Effects of CEO FWC on Firm Performance
Organization Science, 2017, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 228–243, © 2017 INFORMS
VandeWalle D, Brown SP, Cron WL, Slocum JW Jr (1999) The influ-
ence of goal orientation and self-regulation tactics on sales
performance: A longitudinal field test. J. Appl. Psych. 84(2):
249–259.
Waldman DA, Ramírez GG, House RJ, Puranam P (2001) Does
leadership matter? CEO leadership attributes and profitability
under conditions of perceived environmental uncertainty. Acad.
Management J. 44(1):134–143.
Wall TD, Michie J, Patterson M, Wood SJ, Sheehan M, Clegg CW,
West M (2004) On the validity of subjective measures of com-
pany performance. Personnel Psych. 57(1):95–118.
Christopher S. Reina is an assistant professor in the
Department of Management at Virginia Commonwealth Uni-
versity. Christopher received his Ph.D. in business adminis-
tration (management) from the W. P. Carey School of Busi-
ness at Arizona State University. His research focuses on
243
the intersection of leadership, mindfulness, and emotions in
the workplace and how they facilitate employee engagement,
performance, and well-being.
Suzanne J. Peterson is an associate professor at Arizona
State University’s Thunderbird School of Global Manage-
ment. She received her Ph.D. from the University of Nebraska
at Lincoln. Her current research interests include CEO lead-
ership, women on boards, and drivers of high performance
in individuals, groups, and firms.
Zhen Zhang is an associate professor at the W. P. Carey
School of Business, Arizona State University. He received
his Ph.D. from the University of Minnesota. His research
focuses on leadership process and leadership development,
work teams and groups, biological basis of work behavior,
entrepreneurship, and advanced research methods.